Health Sector 
Transformation Program
Delivery Plan
HSTP-SASH-0005.2
5 SEPTEMBER 2021
Delivery plan 2020-2021
Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques
King Salman bin Abdulaziz Al Saud
My primary objective is for our 
country to be a global model of 
excellence, on all fronts

The future of the Kingdom is one of great 
promise and potential. Our precious country 
deserves more than it has achieved. Therefore, 
we will expand and develop our talents and 
capabilities to craft this future
His Royal Highness
Prince Mohammed bin Salman bin Abdulaziz
Crown Prince, Deputy Prime Minister and Chairman of the 
Council of Economic and Development Affairs
Foreword
In a wise and benevolent gesture from the rulers of this nation, may God protect them, the 
Basic Law of Governance of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia guarantees free healthcare and 
treatment for citizens, as stipulated in Article 31: “The State shall be solicitous of public 
health and provide health care for every citizen in cases of emergency, illness, disability and 
old age.” Moreover, in the Royal Decree No. M/11, dated 23/3/1423 AH (corresponding to 
4/6/2002 AD), Article 2 states that the system aims to ensure the provision of comprehensive, 
integrated healthcare to all the population in a manner that is fair, accessible and organized.
The launch of the Health Sector Transformation Program reinforces this human dimension, 
emphasizing continuity, development of the health system in general and enhanced quality 
of care and services provided. As part of Saudi Vision 2030, the Health Sector 
Transformation Program was established to contribute to the realization of the “Vibrant 
Society”, one of the main pillars of the Kingdom’s vision. To meet its objectives, the 
program seeks to restructure the health sector, consequently enhancing its capabilities as an 
effective, integrated ecosystem that sets the health of every member of society at the 
forefront of its priorities.
The program will work to achieve improved health and healthcare services in cooperation 
with all public & private health sector bodies, and in alignment with the strategic national 
objectives for Vision 2030.
The program will also work to complete the implementation of the four strategic objectives 
set out for the Kingdom’s health system, having transitioned from the National 
Transformation Program to the Health Sector Transformation Program, as well as initiatives 
associated with it. The strategic objectives are: facilitating access to health services, 
improving the quality and efﬁciency of services, promoting prevention of health risks, and 
enhancing trafﬁc safety.
Furthermore, the program will develop a national strategy for the transformation of the 
health sector as a whole, in cooperation with all associated parties, establishing a 
comprehensive plan encompassing all health and healthcare bodies at the national level and 
taking into account the responsibilities, specialties and previous successes of each entity.

11
12
15
16
17
18
20
23
24
29
32
34
36
39
43
44
45
50
52
57
70
77
78
85
Contents
Preface
Introduction
Chapter 1
Health Sector Transformation Program scope
About the Health Sector Transformation Program
HSTP strategic objectives  
  Level 3 direct objectives
  Level 3 indirect objectives
  Public policies
  HSTP commitments and ambitions
Chapter 2
Current conditions
Core challenges
Key factors contributing to these challenges
Challenges arising from the Covid-19 pandemic
Quick solutions and measures to combat Covid-19
Chapter 3
Strategic cornerstones of the Health Sector
Transformation Program
Health Sector Transformation Program
Main challenge areas
Strategic cornerstones
HSTP aspirations for the future of the health sector
Mechanism for achieving future aspirations
HSTP strategic branches
Chapter 4
Initiatives portfolio
Priority initiatives
Current initiatives
٩

١١
11
12
15
16
17
18
20
23
24
29
32
34
36
39
43
44
45
50
52
57
70
77
78
85
Saudi Vision 2030 has several strategic objectives and performance indicators built 
on the fundamental pillars of our joint commitments. Together, the public, private 
and third sectors will work to realize these objectives as mandated by the Council of 
Economic and Development Affairs and under the leadership of His Royal Highness 
Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman.
The vision realization programs aim to translate Saudi Vision 2030 into multiple 
delivery plans designed to achieve its strategic objectives through innovative 
practices aligned with national objectives, following a speciﬁed timetable towards 
successful completion.
By royal decree, the Health Sector Transformation Program was launched to 
restructure the sector into a comprehensive and effective health ecosystem to meet 
the requirements and achieve the ambitions of Saudi Vision 2030.
Delivery Plan
In line with Saudi Vision 2030 and its aspirations for achieving the Kingdom's 
potential and untapped capabilities, a new phase of the Health Sector 
Transformation Program has been set into motion. The objective of this phase is to 
outline an operational plan for the program that will achieve an enhanced level of 
health and beneﬁciary services contributing to a prosperous, sustainable future.
Implementation of the delivery plan will launch efforts in the transformation of the 
health sector through a series of initiatives at the national level, clarifying and 
assigning responsibilities to achieve health and healthcare excellence in the 
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
Preface
11
Saudi Vision 2030 was launched as a roadmap for economic and 
developmental efforts, setting objectives and deﬁning commitments and 
responsibilities. To implement the Kingdom's ambitions, the Vision will 
reinforce the nation's position as a pioneering model of success globally and 
across various ﬁelds. Saudi Vision 2030 is built on three fundamental pillars: 
a vibrant society, a thriving economy, and an ambitious nation. 
They function in harmony to achieve the desired objectives and maximize 
the beneﬁts of the vision.
Introduction
Vibrant Society
Thriving Economy
 Ambitious Nation
Saudi Vision 2030 strives to ensure a vibrant 
society by providing a rich and fulﬁlled life for 
all, and in doing so enabling society to be the 
driving force behind economic prosperity.
We will achieve these objectives by drawing on the Kingdom's intrinsic 
strengths, its unique location and potential, and by attracting the best talent 
and increased global investments.
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
Heart of the Arab and Islamic worlds
Investment powerhouse
Hub connecting three continents
Saudi Vision 2030 aspires to a 
transformation embodied by highly 
effective, transparent and 
accountable governance, enabling 
citizens, the private sector and 
non-proﬁt institutions to explore all 
available opportunities to achieve 
their objectives.
Saudi Vision 2030 endeavors to provide a 
supportive and empowering environment 
capable of releasing untapped innovation 
in the business sector, contributing to 
economic expansion and employment 
opportunities for all Saudis. 
13
Chapter 1:
Health Sector Transformation 
Program Scope
About the Health Sector 
Transformation Program
The program aims to restructure the Saudi health sector, enhancing its status and 
capabilities as an effective, integrated, value-based ecosystem centered on the 
health of the patient. The HSTP furthermore strives towards transparency and 
ﬁnancial sustainability by promoting public health and disease prevention and 
implementing modern healthcare paradigms.
The program also aims to facilitate citizen’s access to free health and healthcare 
services and insurance. This is accomplished by guaranteeing fair and comprehensive 
geographical coverage across all regions of the Kingdom, expanding e-health 
services and digital solutions, and improving the quality of healthcare. In addition, 
the program will focus on increasing levels of beneﬁciary satisfaction by 
implementing value-based healthcare and international best practices and 
enhancing community awareness of trafﬁc safety.
Moreover, the Health Sector Transformation Program will work in cooperation and 
in coordination with all health sector bodies, Vision Realization Programs and 
relevant government entities to align with the strategic national and Vision 2030 
objectives throughout the transformation journey.
16
HSTP Strategic Objectives 
Facilitating access to healthcare services
Enhancing trafﬁc safety
Improving quality and efﬁciency of health services
Promoting prevention of health risks
Improve quality of life in Saudi cities 
Improve health services
Enable full and healthy lives
Vibrant society
Level 2 objectives
Branch objectives 
Level 3 objectives
Strategic objectives 
Saudi Vision 2030 pillar
One of the three major pillars
Level 1 objectives
Overarching objectives 
17
The program contributes to achieving:
HSTP Strategic Objectives 
Facilitating access to healthcare services
Enhancing trafﬁc safety
Improving quality and efﬁciency of health services
Promoting prevention of health risks
Improve quality of life in Saudi cities 
Improve health services
Enable full and healthy lives
Vibrant society
Level 2 objectives
Branch objectives 
Level 3 objectives
Strategic objectives 
Saudi Vision 2030 pillar
One of the three major pillars
Level 1 objectives
Overarching objectives 
17
The program contributes to achieving:
Facilitating 
access to 
healthcare services
Improving 
the quality and 
efﬁciency of health 
services
Promoting 
prevention of 
health risks
Enhancing 
trafﬁc safety
Level 3 Direct Objectives
Through the creation of a detailed national strategy for the health sector as a 
whole, the program strives to achieve a series of direct objectives that have been 
transferred from the National Transformation Program to the Health Sector 
Transformation Program. Namely:
18
2.1.1 Facilitate access to healthcare services:  Four factors 
will be addressed to ensure beneﬁciary access to healthcare 
services at the right time and place: expansion of total capacity 
(hospital beds and medical staff), appropriate geographical 
distribution (distance between beneﬁciary and healthcare 
provider), timely access to relevant services, and the 
affordability of healthcare for individuals.
2.1.3 Promote prevention of health risks: This objective 
consists of strategies for better health throughout life: 
addressing social causes of health and health inequality, better 
health and healthcare for an aging population, chronic disease 
prevention, effective care for people with mental health and 
advancing the health of the general  population. The objective 
covers preventive public health to reduce exposure to disease, 
and the management of health crises pertaining to both 
communicable and non-communicable diseases, including 
epidemics and natural disasters.
2.3.4 Enhance trafﬁc safety: Trafﬁc safety addresses the 
following factors, arranged by the magnitude of resulting 
damage: injuries, accidents, and the spread of serious 
violations.
2.1.2 Improve quality and efﬁciency of healthcare services: 
This objective focuses on enhancing the quality and efﬁciency of 
healthcare services and free insurance for citizens by supporting 
the sector's response to the health needs and expectations of the 
community, and by promoting safe, effective and ﬁnancially 
sustainable health coverage.
19

4.4.3
Attract global talent
4.1.5
Provide quality resources for 
distinguished talent in priority ﬁelds
3.1.3
Privatize selected 
government services
4.1.7
Expand vocational training
3.3.2
Develop digital economy
4.1.6
Ensure alignment of educational 
outputs with labor market needs
3.1.6
Attract foreign and 
domestic investments
3.1.2
Unlock state-owned assets for 
the private sector
Level 3 Indirect Objectives
20
6.3.1
Develop non-proﬁt sector
5.2.5
Improve quality of services 
provided to beneﬁciaries
5.4.1
Ensure developmental 
and food security
5.2.4
Develop e-government 
5.3.3
Enhance interaction of government 
agencies with beneﬁciary feedback
5.1.2
Diversify government 
revenues
5.2.3
Improve productivity of 
government employees
6.1.2
Encourage volunteer work
21

Preparedness to 
respond to health risks 
by strengthening 
health security
Quality of care 
through effective 
strategy and 
governance
Healthcare ﬁnancing 
and resource 
allocation to ensure 
optimal value 
Health beneﬁts 
based on real 
beneﬁciary needs
Executive system for 
the provision of 
integrated healthcare 
services 
Competent, 
distinguished and 
adequate health 
workforce
Healthcare innovation Healthcare system 
built on value
Health inclusion across 
all policies
Reducing deaths and 
injuries caused by 
trafﬁc accidents
1 2
3 4
5 6
7 8
9 10
23
Public Policies
The program abides by a comprehensive system of public policies to ensure the 
sustainability of reforms and increase spending efﬁciency. Centered around the four 
strategic objectives, HSTP policies cover several areas, including:

National
Health
System
Providing integrated,
people-centered healthcare
Achieving effective,
sustainable ﬁnancial resource
management
Investing in private sector
integration to create effective
strategic partnerships
Employing digital and virtual
health tools and artiﬁcial
intelligence
HSTP Commitments and Ambitions
Through its four strategic objectives for health transformation, the program will 
contribute to achieving Saudi Vision 2030 aspirations and make a tangible positive 
impact on multiple fronts in the development of a national health system:
•  Providing beneﬁciary-centered, integrated healthcare built on enhanced prevention,  
 quality, efﬁciency and beneﬁciary satisfaction through outcome evaluation
•  Achieving effective, sustainable ﬁnancial resource management with the aim of 
 improving the quality of outcomes and reducing waste and duplication
•  Employing digital and virtual health tools, artiﬁcial intelligence, and best practice 
 documentation to achieve effective quality healthcare 
•  Investing in private sector integration to create effective strategic partnerships in 
 the pursuit of national health objectives
24
• A healthy, improved life for the beneﬁciary - supported 
by a modern healthcare model that contributes to enhancing 
the health of the beneﬁciary and preventing chronic diseases. 
Following the recent increase in average life expectancy from 
74 to 75 years, planned changes will contribute to a further 
increase of ﬁve years in average life expectancy in the 
Kingdom – reaching 80 years – in line with Saudi Vision 2030 
and life expectancy rates in G8 countries.
• Improved healthcare in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia 
by setting national standards for quality and governance of 
monitored service provision (public and private sectors) by the 
health sector regulator and controller (Ministry of Health).
• Improved efﬁciency of healthcare providers, resulting in 
the ﬁnancial sustainability of national healthcare, as well as a 
decrease in the average growth rate of public spending on 
healthcare. The private sector will also play a major role in 
providing healthcare to beneﬁciaries.
• A strong and resilient Saudi health system, able to 
protect the beneﬁciary in the face of various health challenges, 
including outbreaks of infectious diseases and epidemics, 
natural disasters and other emergencies. Among the aims of 
self-sufﬁciency are to secure 70% of the supplies speciﬁed as 
health security priorities, such as personal protection 
equipment, sterilizers and instant examination tools.
• Beneﬁciary access to high-quality healthcare that meets 
their needs while addressing dual eligibility for services and 
containing the costs of care. The program will develop health 
services based on best practices and successful precedents.
The program aspires to achieve the following:
25

• Coverage for all citizens. The Center for National Health 
Insurance is a national entity concerned with paying 
healthcare costs, and its mission is to enhance the value and 
quality of healthcare. As such, the Center will be responsible 
for providing free health insurance to beneﬁciaries by 
purchasing health services from providers. The aim of the 
center is to create a sustainable ﬁnancing mechanism 
contingent on output, and which guides the process of 
health service purchase from health cluster operators in 
alignment with global practices built around beneﬁciary 
satisfaction. This mechanism guarantees the sustainability of 
free health services for citizens.
• Provision of healthcare through health clusters, an 
integrated health system modeled on international best 
practice. This will raise the level of beneﬁciary care by 
integrating primary, secondary and specialized care, and 
eliminating duplication of services. Digital technologies, 
e-health and information technology will be employed to 
provide virtual (remote) healthcare aligned with best practices 
and based on the veriﬁed implementation of the modern care 
model across the Kingdom’s regions.
• A developed infrastructure for revenue management, 
across integrated healthcare institutions in coordination with 
local companies and all stakeholders.
• A private sector motivated to participate in the 
transformation of the health sector and an increase in the 
proportion of private sector investments in the health sector.
• An updated and effective system of enhanced trafﬁc 
safety and a reduction in damages resulting from 
non-compliance with trafﬁc rules, such as deaths, injuries, 
violations, and general accidents.
26

Chapter 2:
Current Conditions

31
The Saudi population has seen a remarkable improvement in health since 
the launch of Saudi Vision 2030, which has played a signiﬁcant role in 
raising the Kingdom's readiness to face health crises, including:
• Swift implementation of effective measures to promote and protect 
public health, thereby curbing the spread of disease.
• Rapidly establishing national and regional command centers to manage 
the healthcare response to the novel coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic and 
to avoid overwhelming the healthcare system.
• Implementing a phased return to normal social and economic conditions 
while prioritizing containment of the novel coronavirus (Covid-19).
This section outlines the current status of the four strategic objectives, 
around which the program will build a national strategy for health 
transformation incorporating all program participants.

2
4
In 2016, the number of people 
with diabetes reached 4.6 
million. This number is 
expected to almost double by 
2030, rising to 8.4 million. 
Therefore, corrective measures 
must be taken to reinforce 
preventive health.
In addition to developing 
agility in response to 
emergencies, there is a need to 
strengthen governance systems 
that contribute to reducing 
challenges to the health of the 
population and the quality of 
health services provided.
3
1
An average of 90,000 citizens 
annually suffer premature 
deaths from chronic diseases.  
The average life expectancy is 
5.2 years below the global 
average. Therefore, preventive 
care measures must be taken to 
address multiple health 
conditions, including heart 
disease, stroke, diabetes, 
respiratory diseases, mental 
health, congenital diseases and 
trafﬁc accidents.
In parallel with its renaissance, 
the Kingdom is also witnessing 
an accelerated level of 
population growth. The total 
population is expected to 
increase from 33.4 million in 
2018 to 39.4 million in 2030, 
causing a rise in demand for 
health services.
Core Challenges
The four strategic objectives of the health system address eight 
challenges facing Saudi healthcare:
32
5
7
The high rate of deaths and 
injuries resulting from trafﬁc 
accidents causes signiﬁcant 
human, societal and ﬁnancial 
losses. It also places substantial 
pressure on the health sector due 
to the costs allocated to 
providing healthcare and 
rehabilitation for the injured.
Trafﬁc accidents cause not only 
human loss and reduced life 
expectancy in the Kingdom, but 
also lifelong suffering as a result 
of injuries that change the 
quality of life of survivors.
Effort must be made to address 
duplication of health service 
provision and ﬁnancing for the 
same beneﬁciary.
8
6
The overlapping roles of the 
regulatory body and the health 
or ﬁnancial service provider 
leads to conﬂicts of interest. 
This gives rise to the necessity 
for a single regulatory body – 
at the level of the health sector 
– to enhance coordination 
efforts between government 
entities, implement monitoring 
and accountability mechanisms, 
and reduce absenteeism by 
clarifying roles and 
responsibilities.
The gap between supply and 
demand in the health 
workforce has led to an 
increased dependence on 
foreign labor.
33

Key factors contributing to these 
challenges
• The current healthcare model tends towards treatment rather than prevention, 
expending great efforts to deal with and treat diseases instead of focusing on 
avoiding them in the ﬁrst place through preventive principles. Similarly, the current 
health system tends more towards ﬁnding solutions related to resources and 
personnel than those related to beneﬁciaries.
• Poor integration between primary, secondary, and specialized care, and their 
balanced distribution throughout the Kingdom. In addition, there is a need to 
develop extended care services such as rehabilitation, long-term care and home 
healthcare, as well as enhanced management of bed occupancy according to the 
level of care required.
• The current infrastructure requires development to support electronic, digital and 
virtual (remote) healthcare, which has become a necessity in light of current 
challenges, especially those related to pandemics and health threats.
• Policies and legal frameworks need updating to allow for enhanced cooperation 
and integration between government entities and the private sector as it pertains to 
investments and implementation of tasks.
34
• Inaccessibility of required services to beneﬁciaries, in terms of both quality and 
quantity, can be remedied with the implementation of treatment protocols and 
mechanisms to measure healthcare outcomes. There is also a need for the sector to 
empower its workforce and raise its capabilities through various development 
programs, as well as improve efﬁciencies by reducing duplication of services for 
patients who have dual eligibility, and who receive care across multiple healthcare 
institutions.
• The Ministry of Health's position as payer, regulator and service provider may 
affect the governance of the health sector, in addition to impacting coordination of 
healthcare provision and investments between the ministry and both the public and 
private sectors. Separating functions will promote greater governance, transparency 
and clarity of the roles and responsibilities through checks and balances to ensure 
high-quality care and services to all beneﬁciaries and an appropriate response to 
health security concerns.
• Trafﬁc safety policies, protocols, laws and regulations are inconsistent with best 
practices and comprehensive standards. Policy development will contribute to 
enhancing trafﬁc safety by setting standards for emergency service and rapid 
response to trafﬁc accidents in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
35

Challenges 
of the novel 
coronavirus 
(Covid-19)
Individual andsocietal
Governance and
regulations
Health and
prevention
Data andtechnology 
Research and
development
Infrastructure
and logisticalsupport 
Challenges arising from the novel 
coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia has achieved great success in combatting the novel 
coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic, proving its capabilities as one of the most effective 
national responses to the virus and avoiding potentially vast losses.
Nonetheless, the Kingdom seeks to reach even greater levels of efﬁciency and 
accomplishment, setting clear objectives to be a global pioneer of crisis 
management and prevention.
The novel coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic has presented many challenges to 
nations around the world, affecting various sectors. The challenges facing the 
Kingdom can be summarized in the following six branches:
36

38
Quick solutions and measures to combat 
the novel coronavirus (Covid-19)
Infrastructure and Logistics:
• Developing and operating existing and unoccupied healthcare 
facilities, including hospitals, laboratories and medical cities, to function 
at full capacity, thereby bridging the gap and increasing response levels 
to disasters and crises
• Utilizing the capabilities and expertise of the private sector to increase 
capacity and infrastructure and meet the growing demand for health 
services
• Implementing integrated mechanisms to track and monitor the 
provision of medical supplies and security stocks
• Facilitating access to healthcare in remote geographical areas 
Data and Technology:
• Accelerating the development and activation of the uniﬁed health 
record and integration with the Absher system
• Completing and accelerating the full implementation of virtual care 
and telemedicine services
• Updating the national digital transformation strategy to include 
advanced technology solutions
• Introducing more community interaction applications to follow up and 
report cases
• Establishing a uniﬁed national database that issues status reports in 
real-time
39

Health and Prevention:
• Monitoring the implementation of public health policies in densely populated areas
• Utilizing national health data to identify, address and contain segments of the 
beneﬁciary population most exposed to health risks
• Accelerating the implementation of the modern healthcare model at the national 
level to leverage its strength in raising awareness and educating the individual and 
society
• Securing personal protection equipment for health practitioners as well as residents 
to limit the spread of diseases and epidemics
• Enhancing medical capacity by supporting and activating the role of the non-proﬁt 
sector and volunteer programs
• Increasing local security stocks of essential medicines, supplies and medical devices
• Initiating the constituent elements of primary care, telemedicine and virtual 
healthcare
Governance and Regulations:
• Establishing a national committee for preparedness and response to health 
emergencies (epidemics, health disasters, etc.) under the leadership of the Ministry 
of Health, deﬁning committee roles and responsibilities to allow for rapid and 
effective response to conditions
• Developing a health security and self-sufﬁciency strategy to guide all phases of 
planning, managing, securing and nationalizing the needs of the Kingdom in terms 
of medicines, medical supplies and equipment
• Recommending the necessity to initiate and strictly enforce regulations and laws 
related to crowded areas, informal residential areas (slums), and worker housing
• Enforcing compliance of social distancing and limitations on crowding through the 
use of modern technologies (cameras, drones, etc.)
• Addressing the phenomenon of illegal residents through a period of voluntary 
disclosure
• Carrying out continuous sterilization of gathering places and imposing penalties 
on violators
• Enhancing sources of ﬁnancing and provisions allowing ﬂexibility of procurement 
policies in times of crisis, as was successfully accomplished during the Covid-19 pandemic
40
Research and Development:
• Documenting lessons learned from current and previous crises (successes and 
challenges)
• Developing a strategy and governance system for research and innovation in the 
relevant ﬁelds
• Utilizing the existing infrastructure and facilities in the ﬁeld of research and 
development and enhancing them to be ready to operate at full capacity
• Consolidating research and development efforts among entities across various 
ﬁelds, including legislation, governance, infrastructure, systems and human 
resources
• Beneﬁting from the budget allocated for research and development and 
employing it to serve national priorities
• Providing a centralized platform through which research and development 
systems are integrated
• Focusing efforts on diagnosing and developing vaccines and new treatments
• Doubling national expertise and human capital in the ﬁeld of research and 
development and enhancing capabilities to meet growing needs
Individual and Societal:
• Enhancing the quality of awareness toolkits familiarizing citizens and residents 
with health guidelines and the importance of regular check-ups
• Diversifying communication channels to reach the largest number of beneﬁciaries 
of different nationalities, and ensuring that awareness-raising content is 
standardized and produced in multiple languages
• Developing capabilities, efﬁciencies and skills related to planning and response to 
crises and epidemics
41
Chapter 3:
Strategic Cornerstones of 
the Health Sector 
Transformation Program
Health Sector Transformation 
Program
The Health Sector Transformation Program encompasses all health 
entities of the Kingdom's health ecosystem within a strategic 
framework, directed towards key objectives and built on the 
fundamental pillars of Saudi Vision 2030. The program consists of a 
series of initiatives that aim to facilitate access to health services, 
improve the quality and efﬁciency of care, enhance prevention against 
health risks and raise the level of trafﬁc safety.
44
1- Public health
3- Financial 
sustainability of the 
healthcare system
2- Effective delivery 
of quality healthcare
4- Workforce size, 
capabilities and 
participation 
 Key areas
 facing
challenges
Key areas facing challenges
Despite the many achievements made during previous years, since the launch of 
Saudi Vision 2030, the health sector continues to face challenges. These challenges 
fall into four general categories:
45

Average age of the individual
Level of non-communicable diseases posing a health threat
46
Challenges to Public Health:
Prevalence of major health risks in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
Trafﬁc accident deaths and injuries
National response to health emergencies
47
Challenges to effective delivery of 
quality healthcare:
The cost of healthcare is increasing at a faster rate than the increase in 
national income, which reﬂects the challenges facing the current 
healthcare model and the huge costs it bears for treating diseases 
rather than preventing them in the ﬁrst place.
Dual service provision and poor coordination between providers, 
which leads to high costs of care stemming from the duplication of 
services for the same case.
Poor incentives within the system to reduce cost and maximize value.
Limited participation of the private sector in ﬁnancing and providing 
public healthcare.
Challenges to ﬁnancial sustainability 
of the healthcare system:
48
Attracting and retaining doctors, nurses and other skilled 
healthcare professionals in sufﬁcient numbers to meet the needs of 
beneﬁciaries.
Effective recruitment consistent with education, especially in light 
of the transformation of the welfare system in the Kingdom of 
Saudi Arabia.
Inconsistency of policies with employment practices in the health 
sector, and an absence of linkage between reward and the 
provision of value-based healthcare.
Challenges to workforce size, 
capabilities and participation:
49
Better health
Better sustainability
Better care
Better workforce
Strategic Cornerstones
The program's efforts to transform the health sector are built on four strategic 
cornerstones:
50

Raising the average life expectancy in the Kingdom from 75 
to 80 years by launching a series of initiatives within the 
National Transformation Program aimed at reducing health 
risks affecting average life span and quality of life
Focusing on preventive health to address the key health 
challenges facing the population to reduce the health 
burdens of non-communicable diseases such as diabetes, 
cardiovascular disease, respiratory diseases and common 
mental illnesses
Health is an integral part of government policies. Policies 
are evaluated in terms of their health effects on Saudi 
society and their effectiveness in promoting the general 
health of beneﬁciaries.
HSTP aspirations for the future of the 
health sector
The program aspires to bring about a qualitative transformation in the 
healthcare and service provision model, and will work to provide signiﬁcant 
improvements in both public health and health services across these four strategic 
cornerstones by 2030.
Better health Public health improvements will include:
52
Working to reduce the number of road deaths in line 
with international ﬁgures: 10 per 100,000 people
Focusing on the principle of health security thereby 
enhancing the Kingdom's ability to respond to and 
recover from health challenges, including epidemics, 
outbreaks of infectious diseases, and negative health 
consequences resulting from major natural disasters and 
industrial accidents
53

Better care Radically improving beneﬁciary healthcare services by:
Enabling all beneﬁciaries to access healthcare services 
regardless of place of residence or category of provider.
Restructuring healthcare delivery to ensure compliance with 
the modern model of care, in line with international and 
local best and good practices, and maximizing results while 
minimizing costs.
Enacting a digital revolution in the ﬁeld of healthcare, with 
e-health and virtual care as the core, making it easier for 
beneﬁciaries to access care services. Digital technologies, 
including artiﬁcial intelligence, will be employed to help 
make better clinical decisions, and hospitals will have 
instant access to each patient's comprehensive healthcare 
record.
Providing a sufﬁcient number of doctors, nurses and other 
healthcare professionals, raising the level of their 
capabilities, and ensuring their optimal distribution to 
secure high-quality healthcare provision for all beneﬁciaries.
Providing quality healthcare to a national standard, 
integrated across all service providers. In addition, standards 
will be regulated and veriﬁed, and treatment results will be 
measured to ensure caregivers are committed to providing 
quality care.
54
Reducing ineffective care, and carefully evaluating 
treatments in terms of clinical effectiveness and 
affordability, thus enhancing spending efﬁciency.
Improving coordination between caregivers to ensure 
optimized capacity and fully utilized facilities capable of 
responding to urgent needs. This will contribute to 
reducing duplication of healthcare service provision and 
the resulting misuse.
Offering incentives to encourage all healthcare providers to 
deliver better value. Financing mechanisms will be 
signiﬁcantly reformed and budgets based on health needs.
The private sector will be a strategic contributor to 
healthcare and will play a major role in developing and 
providing healthcare services to beneﬁciaries, including 
those availing government health services.
Implementation of the modern care model will reduce the 
cost burden on healthcare budgets, and the negative 
impact of high-cost, widespread diseases such as diabetes 
will be minimized.
Better sustainability Controlling healthcare cost by:
55
To achieve better health, better care, better sustainability and a better 
workforce, the Health Sector Transformation Program will complete 
implementation of the radical transformation approved for the Ministry of 
Health, the largest healthcare provider in the Kingdom.
Better workforce Sufﬁcient and capable health workforce
The workforce strategy will focus on ensuring the 
appropriate number of health professionals, such as doctors 
and nurses, and creating optimal multidisciplinary teams. 
The strategy will also address recruitment and training of 
personnel to provide effective, value-aware, quality services. 
Effective workforce planning will take into consideration 
demography, comorbidities, healthcare use, and GDP 
growth, and relies on an understanding of the healthcare 
models, skills and professional expertise required to meet 
health needs. Planning should incorporate the workforce as 
a whole and take into account all factors related to supply 
and demand.
Results will reveal a clear correlation between the reward 
system and value-based care, so that the income of health 
professionals increases according to their contribution to 
the provision of value-oriented care and the achievement of 
desired objectives.
Mechanism for achieving future 
aspirations
56
This is accomplished through strategic reform initiatives designed to 
achieve the target conditions:
1. Health sector governance initiative
2. Modern care model initiative
3. Institutional transformation of healthcare facilities initiative
4. National health insurance and new ﬁnancing models initiative
5. E-health initiative
6. Workforce initiative
7. Private sector participation initiative
Health governance is being radically reformed to advance the objective 
of improving the quality and value of care, in line with international best 
practices. As such, clear and distinct markers will differentiate the roles of 
healthcare regulator and monitor, provider, and ﬁnancier.
The role of the Ministry of Health will be redeﬁned as the regulator and 
monitor of the health sector. On this basis, the Ministry will cease its role 
as a care provider in order to perform its future function, which is to 
ensure that all beneﬁciaries receive care that meets the standards set at 
the national level for quality and that the health ecosystem works for the 
beneﬁt of the beneﬁciary. The ministry will provide licenses to healthcare 
providers, conduct inspections to safeguard national standards of quality 
and value, and intervene effectively to protect the health of 
beneﬁciaries, ensuring that the healthcare provider is accountable for 
meeting the established standards.
The ministry will also play a role in ensuring that the system’s needs are 
understood and acted upon, bringing an end to service duplication, securing 
investment in low-access areas, and deﬁning the national health strategy, 
especially as it relates to beneﬁciary health and disease prevention.
Health sector governance
57

58
Health clusters will work to fundamentally change beneﬁciary care to meet the 
standards set by the modern care model in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. All hospitals 
and primary care centers will be allocated to health clusters across the Kingdom, each 
serving approximately one million people. Each cluster will consist of primary care 
centers, general hospitals, and specialized services, so that any beneﬁciary 
undergoing examination in the cluster may avail of all the required services through 
an integrated administrative system. Cluster administrations are responsible for 
ensuring the ﬂexibility of service procedures, the speed of service delivery, and 
beneﬁciary satisfaction.
In line with Saudi Vision 2030, and as part of endeavors to develop a healthcare 
system that contributes to empowering beneﬁciaries, the model of care was designed 
based on the following principles:
• Enabling beneﬁciaries and their families to control their health
• Providing beneﬁciaries with the necessary information, as part of their treatment, 
and raising their awareness to the ways they may have better control of their health
• Seamless integration of the health system on the beneﬁciary level
• Maintaining a holistic view of the health of the individual by taking a preventive 
approach rather than a solely curative approach
• Providing treatment that focuses on both the curative results and the treatment’s 
suitability to the beneﬁciary – neither suboptimal nor excessive
Modern Care Model
Impact on the beneﬁciary
Care closer to 
home
Reduction in 
waiting time for 
services
Increase in 
health system 
capacity
Comprehensive healthcare 
within one system (cluster)
Healthcare based on end results 
and beneﬁciary satisfaction
٨٥
Institutional Transformation of Healthcare Facilities 
Hospital
This will result in enhancing the value and quality of the beneﬁciary 
care experience, improving upon the current state: 
Care Systems
Chronic disease care Managing chronic diseases (e.g., diabetes)
Promoting health and disease prevention
Providing care to beneﬁciaries in the ﬁnal stages and to their families
Providing care for pregnant women and newborns
Treating emergency and critical cases
Providing elective care for non-critical cases
Preventive care
Palliative care
Child and maternity care
Urgent care
Scheduled care
 The modern care model ensures safe, swift, beneﬁciary-centered care
provided efﬁciently and effectively
 
 
 
 Physical
health
Mental
health
Social health
60
Hospital
Bone surgeonCardiologist Vascular
surgeon
EndocrinologistPhysiotherapist
 Emergency
doctor
 Pulmonologist
Nutritionist Optometrist
 Heart
disease
Diabetes
Arthritis
Hypertension
Pharmacy
 Primary care
facility
RadiologyLaboratory
61
To the future state:
 Uniﬁed
 health
record
Pleasant care experience in the target system
Meet Sarah, a 70-year-old woman
Current healthcare delivery system (non-integrated)
1- Healthcare focus on 
hospital treatment 
provided after the 
onset of illness
2- Limited efﬁciency 
and quality (access to 
costly, repetitive, 
uncoordinated care)
3- Absence of 
appropriate tools to 
enable beneﬁciary 
effective access to the 
necessary healthcare 
1- Healthcare focus on 
prevention and 
treatment
2- Efﬁcient, quality 
care beneﬁtting from 
integration and 
coordination to 
provide treatment at 
the lowest cost
3- Digital tools 
enabling the 
beneﬁciary to easily 
access care
Home care
PharmacyRadiologyLaboratory
Hospital
Cardiologist
Bone surgeon
Optometrist
Endocrinologist
Nutritionist
 Vascular
surgeon
Physiotherapist
 Emergency
doctor
 Pulmonologist
 Primary
 care
facility
 Home
care

National Health Insurance and new 
ﬁnancing models within the Ministry 
of Health's transformation strategy
Establishing a national body (namely, the Center for National Health Insurance) to 
pay for healthcare costs serves to enhance the value and quality of health services. 
The entity will be funded by the Ministry of Finance, securing the strategic purchase 
of services, and will form contractual agreements with health clusters to provide free, 
quality care based on needs, whereby the citizen will enjoy 100% comprehensive 
medical coverage of all healthcare requirements, free of charge.
The Center for National Health Insurance will be established as the only national body 
covering citizen healthcare costs, in line with international best practice, creating a 
clear distinction between the caregiver and the ﬁnancier. This enables the ﬁnancier to 
focus solely on paying the value of the service, ensuring quality of care while 
continuing free treatment for citizens.
In effect, the center will receive funding from the Ministry of Finance to meet the 
needs of citizens beneﬁtting from health services. In addition, a beneﬁt package will 
be created and made available to all citizens grounded ﬁrmly in evidence conﬁrming 
clinical and cost effectiveness to ensure the provision of appropriate value care. The 
center will also provide a new ﬁnancing mechanism for the purchase of health 
services from service providers. This will contribute to achieving universal health 
coverage, whereby all citizens receive the health services they need without charge.
The Center for National Health Insurance will ﬁnance health clusters through 
customized payment structures according to the needs of each, which will be based 
on an accurate national census implementing international best practice. In addition, 
the center will create a pace-of-change policy to drive adoption among health 
clusters of a spending methodology built around individual targets, ensuring the 
continuity of current services while providing strong incentives for development.
For ﬁnancing the remaining health sector services, the procurement strategy will be 
determined based on the health sector transformation strategy.
62
E-health Initiative
1
2
3
4
5
Facilitate the introduction of 
signiﬁcantly different approaches 
to care
Facilitate entry into the health 
ﬁeld for new, non-traditional 
service providers
Provide disease forecasting tools
Empower personal care management
Help alert health cadres in the event 
of infectious disease outbreaks
E-health is the effective, safe use of information and communication technologies 
to support health and its related objectives. This includes healthcare services, health 
monitoring, health literature, health education, knowledge and research.
Effective e-health implementation will:
63

Investment in e-health in the Kingdom is expected to offer multiple beneﬁts, 
including the following:
E-Health Initiative
A ﬂexible personal experience, and responsible approach. E-health 
offers beneﬁciaries new ways to interact with and improve the health 
system. A spatial healthcare system may be further enhanced with virtual 
applications, improving access to services at the time and place required 
by the beneﬁciary. E-health also allows individuals more control over their 
lifestyle and health, and builds a greater sense of responsibility.
Safer, more effective services. Quality healthcare relies on full 
knowledge of the patient's health status so that critical healthcare 
decisions may be made based on available diagnostic and clinical 
information, helping to avoid costly medical errors and negative results 
due to absent or erroneous information.
Increased productivity for healthcare practitioners. Given the vital 
role played by skilled medical practitioners in the Kingdom, e-health will 
offer the health workforce the tools necessary to enhance productivity by 
automating administrative tasks, supported by digital information and 
knowledge bases in the provision of the required healthcare.
Effective, integrated system. Efﬁcient use of healthcare resources is the 
key to achieving a sustainable health system. E-health will enable better 
integration of the various healthcare systems across facilities and allow the 
sharing of data, ensuring access to consistent information for curative care 
and reducing duplication of services.
Creation of a new knowledge industry. Implementing digital technologies 
is a challenge that requires a trained workforce. Global experience has shown 
that e-health programs have created tens of thousands of job opportunities, in 
addition to a large number of startups in the ﬁeld of health informatics. 
Moreover, investing in e-health beneﬁts not only the health system, but also 
the economy of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia as a whole.
64
٦
7
8
9
1
2
3
4
5
6
Strengthening compliance and application of quality and 
safety standards in health practices
Facilitating the upload of performance reports and the 
monitoring of target achievements
Providing residents with personal care tools to assist them 
in making better health choices, raise levels of health 
education, and allow interaction with the health system
Integrating continuity of care at all levels within the 
modern care model and supporting the ﬂow of health 
information
Ensuring effectiveness of operations and service provision 
results
Monitoring and ensuring optimal use of healthcare 
resources such as manpower, assets and services
Allowing access to high-quality data that supports medical 
research, policy development and decision-making
Achieving targeted effectiveness in ﬁnancial and human 
resource services, informatics services, supply chain 
management, supporting medical services and quality control
Approving service costs, patient accounts, revenue 
cycles and claims management
E-health is one of the main enablers of the healthcare system within the health 
sector transformation strategy and would achieve the following:
65

E-health Strategy and the role of the Saudi Health 
Information Exchange
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia's e-health strategy consists of important elements 
relevant to the health sector as a whole, incorporating the Ministry of Health, 
other government services and the private sector. The Saudi Health Information 
Exchange constitutes an essential mechanism for the integration of digital 
capabilities across all sectors of the health system.
66
6
7
8
9
10
1
2
3
4
5
The need for more 
health professionals
Raising the ratio of 
clinical staff 
(especially nursing) 
to population
Increasing the 
productivity of 
health staff
Promoting 
Saudization in 
medical and 
nursing roles
Increasing retention 
rates of nursing staff 
Workforce Initiative
In the coming period, we must focus on several points, including:
Improving data and 
statistics on the 
Saudi health 
workforce
Establishing a process 
of regular reviews of 
clinical staff 
performance and 
safety
Establishing a periodic 
renewal system for 
medical and clinical 
staff licenses
Focusing on resources and 
expertise in health sector 
support professions such as 
ﬁnance, health economics, 
planning and the legal ﬁeld
Increasing the number 
of subsidized medical 
training locations for 
graduates
67

Understanding workforce capabilities and demand
The Health Sector Transformation Program is currently preparing a national 
strategy for the health workforce that would identify and analyze categories of 
current workers in the Kingdom. This includes, but is not limited to, 
understanding the major specialties and subspecialties in relation to region and 
facility for all categories of employees. This measure will support the 
development of annual forecasts for workforce demand and determine the gap 
between supply and demand annually until 2030. The forecast will take into 
account supply and demand drivers, including changes in technology, the 
modern care model, and the corporate system. 
Building workforce capacity
Workforce challenges necessitate efforts to strengthen the capabilities of national 
healthcare practices in all major and subspecialties as this will ensure a fair distribution of 
skills throughout the Kingdom based on needs. This includes the ambitious endeavor of 
encouraging qualiﬁed Saudi health workers (whether currently in Saudi Arabia or 
abroad) to return to the health workforce in the Kingdom, a path that may include 
(re)education and training. Also under development is an initiative to improve the 
attractiveness of nursing and other healthcare professions.
68
1
2
3
4
5
Pharmacy
Extended care
Rehabilitation
Long-term care
Home care
6
7
8
9
Primary healthcare
Radiology
Laboratory services
Service launches for 
hospitals and medical cities
Serving the objective of capability building, a national initiative covering 
all major and subspecialties will target the needs identiﬁed through the 
planning phase. The initiative will include providing accreditation to 
teaching hospitals that provide training and establishing family medicine 
academies across the Kingdom.
Private Sector Participation
Private sector participation falls within the strategic context of detailed 
information in nine main areas:
Building workforce capabilities
69

 Health sector governance
and regulation
Health sector value and cost
 Private sector
participation
 Workforce and
education
 Integrated care
provision
 Economic
contribution
Data and digitalization  Public health and health
security
HSTP Strategic branches 
Based on the four cornerstones of better health, better care, better 
sustainability, and a better workforce, the Health Sector Transformation 
Program exists within a framework closely related to the entire health sector. 
Accordingly, the program will work with all stakeholders to develop a strategy 
across the following eight strategic branches:
70
Health Sector governance and 
regulation 
Health Sector value and cost 
1
2
3
1
2
3
Employing governance in the health sector to achieve the target scenario 
by 2030
Regulating the health sector to ensure continuous access to high-quality, 
value-based healthcare
Improving healthcare capacity to ensure value and eliminate duplication 
of service provision
Need-based ﬁnancing for government care providers and strong 
incentives for cost control and efﬁciency
Financing and reimbursement, including funding agency model and 
ﬁnancial reforms to raise efﬁciency while maintaining free treatment for 
citizens
Health beneﬁts package based on actual needs of beneﬁciaries to ensure 
value and cost-effective care
71

Private Sector participation
Workforce and Education
1
Private sector roles required for the ﬁnancing and operation of publicly 
funded healthcare services
2
Main areas of opportunity for the private sector 
3
Practical models to maximize the role of the private sector
1
Employing data to gain a clearer understanding of the major healthcare 
professions required to deliver the modern care model
2
Drafting a supply and demand strategy for increasing local supply, 
recruitment and employee retention
3
Coordinating with academic institutions to secure market needs
4
Linking incentives and compensation to value-based care delivery for 
healthcare professionals
72
Integrated Care provision
Economic Contribution, 
includes the following:
1
Building service provider models based on the requirements for 
integrated care
2
Transitioning all beneﬁciaries in the Kingdom from traditional healthcare 
provision to the modern care model 
3
Focusing on public health and prevention services
4
Improving the quality of care by establishing centers of excellence
1
Attracting investment
2
Research and innovation
3
Biotechnology
4
Saudization
73
Data and Digitalization 
Public health and health security 
1
Uniﬁed electronic health records for all
1
Public health (health in all policies) - health impact assessment and 
promotion of health quality
2
Crisis preparedness - ensure the Kingdom's readiness for any health 
challenges
3 Roads and trafﬁc - measures needed to reduce death and injury rates
4 Hajj and Umrah - health measures to support a safe pilgrimage
2
Virtual care and e-health models
3
Cybersecurity and health data protection
4
Information systems and information technology infrastructure
74
Chapter 4:
Initiatives Portfolio
Priority Initiatives
A detailed study was conducted to outline the lessons learned from the novel 
coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic, the ﬁndings of which necessitate the 
following steps are taken:
1. Developing a clear methodology for crisis response and a national plan for 
crisis and disaster management incorporating health regions and clusters
2. Developing the capability to establish shelters, hospitals, testing centers and 
temporary tents to enhance response to disasters and crises
3. Improving the infrastructure of remote residential areas to improve 
healthcare coverage, enhance communication, and enable remote services, 
especially health services
4. Investing in artiﬁcial intelligence, simulation models and data analysis tools 
to support decision-making
5. Investing in and providing various technological solutions to aid response to 
emergencies
6. Accelerating the full implementation of virtual care and telemedicine services
7. Surveying and using population health data to identify various beneﬁciary 
segments and focus on the most vulnerable
8. Nationalizing the pharmaceutical, medical devices and supplies, and 
vaccination industries
9. Empowering and promoting national industry and local content in terms of 
diagnosis, vaccination and treatment
10. Developing a strategy for change management and communication during 
crises and disasters, including objectives, indicators, initiatives and 
implementation plans
11. Developing a national awareness program to cover cultural and behavioral 
practices (distancing, compliance, personal hygiene and combatting the spread 
of infection)
78
Based on the lessons learned, the following initiatives have been proposed as 
priority initiatives:
• HSTP strategy preparation initiative 
• Health innovation initiative 
• National e-health initiative
• National health security initiative
79
Update the scope of the current strategic plan to include the entire 
health sector in order to improve and promote healthcare services in 
the Kingdom. The themes of this strategy are the health of the 
population, providing safe, high-quality care in line with international 
best practices, ﬁnancial sustainability and transparency by 
implementing value-based healthcare concepts. This is in addition to 
the workforce pillar, that aims to secure and qualify the right leaders, 
health professionals and administrators, and digital and innovative 
services. Among the objectives of the strategy is to reach a ﬂexible 
system that enables effective governance to counteract and manage 
health challenges.
Develop national innovation for the health sector to create an 
ecosystem that accelerates and drives innovation, contributing to 
sustainability, broader opportunities and increased products and 
solutions with added economic value in the health sector. Innovation 
areas include biotechnology, preventive, curative and rehabilitative 
services, public health and e-health, to name a few. The innovation 
system is essential to achieving transformation in the health sector.
وﺻﻒ اﻟﻤﺒﺎدرةاﻟﺠﻬﺔ اﻟﻘﺎﺋﺪة Initiative description
Designing an integrated plan for virtual and remote healthcare to 
enable the transformation of the health sector at the level of service 
providers in all sectors. Constituent elements:
• Remote care follow-up services
• Artiﬁcial intelligence to support decision-making in the health ﬁeld
• Saudi Technical Health Academy
• Individual platform for electronic self-care
• Remote monitoring for advanced home care
• Virtual clinic platform
This includes setting standards and methodologies to assess the current 
situation and ways to improve the virtual health and infrastructure of 
sectors in the Kingdom, studying global and regional best practices, 
and then deﬁning the framework and principles for integrated design. 
Accordingly, a comprehensive execution plan will be deﬁned for each 
of the elements, as well as the functional and technical requirements to 
develop a roadmap for the implementation stages. The scope of work 
also includes developing a stakeholder participation plan and a 
communication plan, in addition to the initiative's governance 
framework to deﬁne roles, responsibilities and working relationships 
between the concerned authorities.
This will be followed by the adoption of the model by service providers, 
its development and launch according to the approved roadmap. 
Support will be provided and work progress and performance indicators 
monitored through interactive electronic control panels based on the 
governance model, which will reveal potential challenges, risks and 
support requirements, and address them in a timely manner.
Leading party
81
Improving 
sustainability and 
ﬁnancial transparency
Improving the patient 
experience
Increased clinical 
(medical) effectiveness
Safety in health 
facilities
HSTP strategy preparation
Improving 
sustainability and 
ﬁnancial transparency
Improving the patient 
experience
Increased clinical 
(medical) effectiveness
Safety in health 
facilities
Health innovation
Strategic pillars Initiative link to 
level 3 objective Initiative name
Increase geographical 
coverage and expand 
health service
Facilitate access to 
emergency medical 
care
Accessible health 
services
National e-health
2.1.2
 Improve quality and 
 efﬁciency of healthcare
services
2.1.2
 Improve quality and 
 efﬁciency of healthcare
services
2.1.1
 Facilitate access to
healthcare services
80
Priority Initiatives
Raising the level of 
preparedness for 
health disasters
National health security2.1.3
 Promote prevention
against health risks
Strategic pillars Initiative link to 
level 3 objective Initiative name
Priority Initiatives
82 83
Preparing a national health security system based on a comprehensive 
strategic approach to assess, prevent, prepare, respond to and recover 
from health threats, emergencies and disasters (such as disease 
outbreaks, epidemics, natural disasters, chemical, biological and 
radiological emergencies, etc.). Developing self-sufﬁciency and 
building the foundations for long-term resilience in order to reduce 
dependence on other countries in the health and pharmaceutical 
ﬁelds, reduce exposure of professional health personnel, ﬁll gaps in 
critical and qualitative medical services, and develop scientiﬁc research 
in the ﬁeld of health security.
وﺻﻒ اﻟﻤﺒﺎدرةاﻟﺠﻬﺔ اﻟﻘﺎﺋﺪة Initiative description Leading party

Program ambitions and commitments, as well as strategic pillars 
and considerations, have been translated into a number of 
initiatives designed to fulﬁll its objectives. These initiatives 
constitute a fundamental building block in achieving the 
aspirations of Saudi Vision 2030 in the following ways:
Current Initiatives
Impact on 
population
1
Contribution to 
improving the 
macroeconomic 
index
3
Contribution to 
attracting the 
private sector
2
Contribution to 
level 3 and 4 
indicators
4
85
Initiative description Leading party
The initiative aims to ensure access to health services for all 
beneﬁciaries, and to achieve an average number of 4 visits per person 
per year (a global indicator) by increasing the number of visitors to 
primary health care services. This will be achieved by the following:
• Implementing the initiative to achieve geographical coverage of 
primary healthcare services for all beneﬁciaries and facilitating access 
to primary healthcare through the implementation of extended hours 
and urgent care for 312 selected health centers
• Upgrading existing primary healthcare center facilities
• Providing modern, advanced medical equipment for diagnosis and 
treatment
• Developing the capabilities of staff specialized in the ﬁeld of family 
medicine and various medical specialties (children, internal medicine, 
obstetrics and gynecology etc.) to provide health services to 
beneﬁciaries
• Employing data and implementing the health information system 
based and uniﬁed medical record
• Facilitating healthcare access for beneﬁciaries in remote areas 
through mobile clinics
• Developing existing centers to become consulting centers offering all 
medical specialties (pediatrics, internal medicine, surgery, gynecology 
and obstetrics, ENT, dermatology)
• Providing exploratory examinations for early detection of diseases 
among school students, and provision of curative and preventive 
services through school health programs
Improving the performance of hospitals and specialized centers of the 
Ministry of Health by increasing production efﬁciency and using 
resources to reduce waiting time in clinics, in addition to reducing the 
waiting period for patients who receive emergency or urgent medical 
care.
The initiative was launched to improve the quality of healthcare 
services provided to patients, with a focus on bridging gaps through a 
set of performance development projects in the following areas: 
mental health, public health, home care, long-term care, laboratories, 
emergency care, diabetes, kidney disease, heart disease, tumors, and 
organ transplantation. Other aims include improving general behavior 
and growth in hospitals and specialized centers, contributing to the 
development of leaders and their workers through improvement 
projects and continuous evaluation and follow-up.
The initiative's work includes the following:
• Deﬁning the scope of work and performance indicators for health 
evaluation in hospitals and specialized centers
• Developing and raising the efﬁciency of hospitals and specialized 
centers in line with best practices in project and quality management
• Training workers in performance indicators and methods of collecting 
the data necessary to measure these indicators
• Determining the baseline for key performance indicators 
• Transferring knowledge to workers in hospitals and specialized 
centers through on-the-job training.
87
Strategic pillars Initiative link to 
level 3 objective Initiative no. Initiative name
Facilitate access to 
consultation with the 
required medical 
specialty
Increase geographical 
coverage and 
distribution of health 
services
Accessible health 
services
Upgrade 
infrastructure and 
health capacity
1-16-027-1207
Reformation and 
restructuring of primary 
healthcare services
Facilitate access to 
consultation with the 
required medical 
specialty
Upgrade 
infrastructure and 
health capacity
1-16-027-0948
Improved performance 
of Ministry of Health 
hospitals and medical 
centers
Current Initiatives
2.1.1
 Facilitate access to
healthcare services
2.1.1
 Facilitate access to
healthcare services
86
Current Initiatives
Upgrade 
infrastructure and 
health capacity
1-16-027-1209
Improved performance 
of Ministry of Health 
primary health care 
centers
Facilitate access to 
consultation with the 
required medical 
specialty
1-16-027-1208
Saudi Center for 
Medical Appointments 
and Referrals
Facilitate access to 
emergency medical 
care
1-16-097-1211
Raised level and 
support of emergency 
medical services
Strategic pillars Initiative link to 
level 3 objective Initiative no. Initiative name
2.1.1
 Facilitate access to
healthcare services
2.1.1
 Facilitate access to
healthcare services
2.1.1
 Facilitate access to
healthcare services
88
This initiative aims to improve the quality of health service provided in 
primary care centers through a set of performance improvement 
projects in a number of categories: quality, radiology, information 
technology, diabetes, and laboratories for 671 health centers by 
studying the current status of the centers and identifying and 
implementing development projects. The initiative would also 
contribute to the training of leaders and workers through follow-up in 
all projects and continuous evaluation.
The initiative's work includes the following:
• Deﬁning the scope of work and performance indicators for health 
evaluation in hospitals and specialized centers
• Developing and raising the efﬁciency of hospitals and specialized 
centers in line with best practices in project and quality management
• Training workers in performance indicators and methods of collecting 
the data necessary to measure these indicators
• Determining the baseline for key performance indicators 
• Transferring knowledge to workers in hospitals and specialized 
centers through on-the-job training
The initiative aims to launch the Saudi Center for Medical Appoint-
ments and Referrals to manage the movement of medical referrals and 
make reservations for all patients referred between health facilities 
inside and outside the Kingdom at all levels of medical service 
provision.
This will be done by designing a uniﬁed electronic system for referral 
and reverse referral so that appointment reservation becomes depend-
ent on real and transparent information regarding the capabilities of 
hospitals (health specialties, medical personnel, family status, etc.) for 
all health sectors (the Ministry of Health, other government sectors, 
the private sector) in real-time when referring or booking appoint-
ments.
The initiative aims to raise the level of emergency preparedness by 
increasing the number of emergency teams and centers to ensure 
geographical coverage, in line with regional and global standards, 
which in turn will improve the response time to emergency alerts. To 
achieve this, the initiative aims to open and operate 140 new aid 
centers by building 35 emergency centers, providing 35 aid centers 
through the third sector, and renting 70 ambulance centers with the 
provision of all operational requirements. This raises the number of 
emergency centers in the Kingdom and contributes to improving 
ambulance response time, reducing the gap with global standards for 
those centers.
Initiative description Leading party
89
Upgrade 
infrastructure and 
health capacity
1-16-027-0896
Development of 
intensive care and 
emergency depart-
ments to ensure service 
speed and quality
Facilitate access to 
emergency medical 
care
Increase geographical 
coverage and 
distribution of health 
services
Upgrade 
infrastructure and 
capacity
1-16-027-1206
Societal participation 
strategy for select 
healthcare professions
Facilitate access to 
emergency medical 
care
1-16-097-1210
Speed of ambulance 
response to emergency 
calls
Strategic pillars Initiative link to 
level 3 objective Initiative no. Initiative name
2.1.1
 Facilitate access to
healthcare services
2.1.1
 Facilitate access to
healthcare services
2.1.1
 Facilitate access to
healthcare services
90
Current Initiatives
The initiative aims to raise the level of medical service provision in 
hospitals through the following scope of work:
• Developing the infrastructure of intensive care departments for 13 
hospitals in various regions of the Kingdom. The development includes 
17 intensive care departments (adults, children, and newborns), and a 
revision of the targeted segments according to modern health 
standards. For example, but not limited to, the use of single rooms for 
each care bed, the use of anti-bacterial materials to prevent the spread 
of infection, the shift from the traditional system to the ﬂexible 
system, which will ensure optimum utilization of the capacity in the 
departments and reduce the period of hospitalization.
• Medical operation of adult and neonatal intensive care units with 9 
intensive care units (adults and newborns) in the following regions: 
Riyadh, Mecca, Al-Mukarramah, Eastern Province, Medina, Jazan, and 
Al-Qassim, in cooperation with the private sector
The initiative aims to increase the attractiveness of the nursing 
profession and encourage citizens to change behavior towards nurses 
and the negative societal image of the nursing profession. This is 
achieved by revising current policies and regulations, drawing up a 
strategy for developing nursing practices, in addition to carrying out 
several campaigns aimed at supporting community participation and 
awareness.
The initiative aims to increase the ﬁeld operational technical capacity 
of the Red Crescent and raise its readiness through integration and 
coordination with the health sectors (public and private) by linking 
the technical systems between them. Technical support will be 
provided to follow up the emergency situation from the time the 
report is received until the arrival of the emergency case at the 
hospital in question using an electronic tracking system for ambulance 
vehicles. The initiative also covers ﬁeld ambulance services manage-
ment systems (electronic paramedic) to facilitate the process of 
automating and recording reports and diagnosing an emergency case, 
as well as training the concerned about these systems in 13 administra-
tive regions.
Initiative description Leading party
91
Safety in health 
facilities
Increase clinical 
(medical) 
effectiveness
Improve the patient 
experience
Improve 
sustainability and 
ﬁnancial 
transparency
1-16-027-0976
Medical insurance and 
healthcare service 
acquisition initiative
Improve 
sustainability and 
ﬁnancial 
transparency
1-16-027-0987 E-health
Safety in health 
facilities 1-16-027-1216
Ensure provision of 
basic safety standards 
and emergency reforms 
of health facilities
Strategic pillars Initiative link to 
level 3 objective Initiative no. Initiative name
2.1.2
 Improve quality and 
 efﬁciency of healthcare
services
2.1.2
 Improve quality and 
 efﬁciency of healthcare
services
2.1.2
 Improve quality and 
 efﬁciency of healthcare
services
92
Current Initiatives
The initiative aims to establish and operate the Center for National 
Health Insurance to create a sustainable ﬁnancing mechanism so that 
the center purchases health services from health cluster operators in 
accordance with the global best practices, which includes beneﬁciary 
satisfaction and improvement of indicators. This mechanism ensures 
free, sustainable health service provision to beneﬁciaries while creating 
incentive programs for service providers.
The initiative will enable comprehensive transformation, including 
free health insurance for beneﬁciaries, institutional transformation, 
and public-private partnerships. The main objective of the initiative is 
to improve the effectiveness and efﬁciency of the healthcare sector 
through IT and digital transformation. The initiative will work to 
achieve e-health implementation in health facilities, raise the 
efﬁciency of e-health outputs by establishing a secure information 
system and, work on linking all systems to create a uniﬁed electronic 
medical record.
The initiative aims to unify standards and procedures that guarantee 
the safety of health facilities, their employees and beneﬁciaries, as 
well as ensure the effectiveness of equipment and support systems to 
achieve safety standards. Veriﬁcation is conducted to ensure the 
availability of the necessary systems and rehabilitate the facilities in 
line with safety standards in design and engineering infrastructure, in 
addition to qualifying and training the workforce to activate these 
systems and apply the necessary safety procedures, including:
• Verify the availability and effectiveness of safety and ﬁre protection 
systems in health facilities
• Rehabilitation of health facilities’ design and engineering 
infrastructure to achieve safety standards
• Plan effective safety and ﬁre protection systems
• Train and qualify workforce
Initiative description Leading party
93
Safety in health 
facilities
Increase clinical 
(medical) effectiveness
Improve the patient 
experience
Improve sustainability 
and ﬁnancial 
transparency
1-16-027-0985 Institutional 
transformation of 
healthcare facilities
Improve sustainability 
and ﬁnancial 
transparency
Improve the patient 
experience
Increase clinical 
(medical) effectiveness
Safety in health 
facilities
1-16-027-0908 Modern healthcare 
model
Strategic pillars Initiative link to 
level 3 objective Initiative no. Initiative name
2.1.2
 Improve quality and 
 efﬁciency of healthcare
services
2.1.2
 Improve quality and 
 efﬁciency of healthcare
services
94
Current Initiatives
The Ministry of Health is currently carrying out the following tasks:
1. Providing healthcare services
2. Financing healthcare services
3. Supervising and regulating the health sector
The initiative aims to provide higher quality healthcare services to 
standards of efﬁciency and productivity, and to separate the provision of 
health services from the Ministry through the formation of 22 health 
clusters divided into two separate groups. One group of 5 clusters will 
be launched by ministerial decree as a test phase to prove the concept of 
institutional transformation. The second group consists of 17 clusters, to 
be launched and operated through ﬁve units across business regions - 
which will be established - supervised by the health holding company - 
which will be established as a government-owned company - so that the 
work units oversee the health clusters through a centralized 
decision-making process. The groupings will eventually be integrated 
into healthcare organizations (Accountable Care Organizations) to 
provide services. Shared functions include: supply chain, information 
technology, laboratories and engineering, in addition to the 
establishment of centers of excellence to cover human resources, 
ﬁnancial and technological information, and revenue cycle management 
for cost coding. The health clusters include a number of service provision 
facilities including primary care centers, hospitals, medical cities, and 
specialized hospitals. All necessary decisions are taken by the 
administration. These include all actions and decisions related to the 
cluster, such as employment and maintenance decisions and transferring 
beneﬁciaries between facilities, and transfer of health personnel 
between clusters according to specialty requirements, allowing swift 
responses to situations without the need to confer with the Ministry.
The initiative aims to map the pathways of healthcare provision 
services starting with preventive care – which promotes health and 
makes the beneﬁciary a partner in the responsibility of maintaining 
health – and extending to all paths that address various health 
challenges. This is done by designing six pathways to healthcare 
provision:  preventive care, emergency care, voluntary care, maternity 
and childcare, extended care, and palliative care.
Initiative description Leading party
95
Improve sustainability 
and ﬁnancial 
transparency
1-16-027-1162 Planning, developing 
and management of 
health sector workforce
Improve sustainability 
and ﬁnancial 
transparency
1-16-028-1012
National Health 
Information Center - 
horizontal national 
e-health initiatives
Strategic pillars Initiative link to 
level 3 objective Initiative no. Initiative name
2.1.2
 Improve quality and 
 efﬁciency of healthcare
services
2.1.2
 Improve quality and 
 efﬁciency of healthcare
services
96
Current Initiatives
The initiative aims to study the current human resources within the 
health sector in various disciplines and professions and identify the 
gap between supply and demand to build a national labor force 
strategy to bridge the gap. This is achieved by linking educational 
outputs and the labor market through workforce planning to identify 
sector demand in various disciplines of health, technical and human 
capital management in cooperation with educational and health 
institutions, and develop programs to build the capabilities of health 
workers.
There exist many healthcare service providers under various executive 
bodies that include university hospitals, hospitals of the ministries of 
defense and the interior, as well as hospitals and facilities of the 
Ministry of Health. As electronic connectivity between the different 
agencies is not available, this causes a doubling of time and ﬁnancial 
effort – such as the duplication of examinations and treatments – as 
well as the difﬁculty of estimating service requirements or their 
availability in the absence of electronic connectivity.
Therefore, the initiative aims to build an electronic infrastructure that 
connects all service providers in a way that enables digital 
transformation in the health sector, allows the sharing of health 
information and avoids re-examination and duplication of services.
The scope of this initiative's work covers developing the health 
infrastructure for digital transformation in the Kingdom through 
optimal planning with health and relevant authorities to deﬁne the 
basic components needed by the health sector to build an 
infrastructure capable of meeting the aspirations of e-health through 
4 systems:
• Uniﬁed electronic health record
• Health knowledge management
• Prescription dispensing management system
• National health payments system (DRG)
The initiative will review the relevant existing legislation and the new 
legislation needed for the optimal application of e-health in 
coordination with the authorities related to digital transformation in 
general, and healthcare providers in particular. Implementation of the 
horizontal e-health model and policies will follow, in coordination 
with all relevant sectors, and launch of the national electronic link 
between sectors operating within the Saudi health system. The 
initiative will also follow up on quality and sustainability by evaluating 
the results of the various horizontal national e-health initiatives in 
coordination with the relevant authorities.
Initiative description Leading party
97
Strategic pillars Initiative link to 
level 3 objective Initiative no. Initiative name
Current Initiatives
Improve sustainability 
and ﬁnancial 
transparency
1-16-098-1229 Operational 
transformation
Improve sustainability 
and ﬁnancial 
transparency
1-16-027-1215 Health sector 
governance
Improve sustainability 
and ﬁnancial 
transparency
1-16-027-1218 Community 
participation
2.1.2
 Improve quality and 
 efﬁciency of healthcare
services
2.1.2
 Improve quality and 
 efﬁciency of healthcare
services
2.1.2
 Improve quality and 
 efﬁciency of healthcare
services
98
Initiative description Leading party
The King Faisal Hospital and Research Center is in the process of 
transitioning to an independent, not-for-proﬁt institution. The 
operational readiness of the institution is a major and fundamental 
requirement to provide support of the objectives of the Health Sector 
Transformation Program in the Kingdom.
Therefore, the initiative aims to equip the organization’s operational 
services, including clinical, ﬁnancial, electronic and human resource 
services to apply international best practices to achieve efﬁciency and 
effectiveness, and enable the hospital to be self-sustaining.
The initiative's scope of work includes the following:
• Developing medical, clinical and nursing services to raise the quality 
and efﬁciency of patient care
• Establishing the Center for Medical Services and Genomics
• Developing research and academic cadres to continue as a world 
leader in research and education
• Developing the information technology infrastructure of the 
institution
• Designing and implementing the target operating model
• Improving the operational efﬁciency of the facilities to rationalize 
consumption
• Improving and developing supply chain projects
• Developing operational services, including ﬁnancial and electronic 
services and human resources 
The governance initiative aims to clearly deﬁne the functions and 
responsibilities of the regulatory roles in the health sector according 
to their respective competencies and scope in order to reduce 
duplication of tasks or functions, and bridge the gaps in the health 
system.
The participation of the charitable and non-proﬁt third sector in health 
care services is limited in comparison to the sector’s contribution 
globally in this ﬁeld, especially considering the size of charitable giving 
in the Kingdom. Therefore, the health sector must strengthen 
supportive legislation for donors to enable them to provide healthcare 
services. The initiative aims to create an enabling environment that 
supports and stimulates social components to participate in the 
provision of healthcare services.
The initiative's scope of work includes creating and developing 
incentives and enabling systems and regulations for donations, 
endowments, volunteering in the health ﬁeld; establishing entities at 
the national level and at the level of the Ministry of Health; and 
designing channels for directing community resources and capabilities 
to meet priority health challenges. 
99
Strategic pillars Initiative link to 
level 3 objective Initiative no. Initiative name
Current Initiatives
Safety in health 
facilities 1-16-027-1214 Saudi Center for Patient 
Safety
Improving 
sustainability and 
ﬁnancial transparency
1-16-098-1228
Organizational 
development of King Faisal 
Specialist Hospital and 
Research Center Gen. Org.
Increase clinical 
(medical) effectiveness 1-16-028-1224
Initiative for the promotion 
of organ donation in 
intensive care units and 
donator hospitals
2.1.2
 Improve quality and 
 efﬁciency of healthcare
services
2.1.2
 Improve quality and 
 efﬁciency of healthcare
services
2.1.2
 Improve quality and 
 efﬁciency of healthcare
services
100
Initiative description Leading party
The Saudi Center for Patient Safety will be fully designed and launched 
to promote a national culture of patient safety reporting and increased 
awareness on issues related to patient safety as well as improving 
capabilities and training.
To keep pace with the requirements of transforming the King Faisal 
Specialist Hospital and Research Center into a non-proﬁt institution, a 
set of measures must be implemented to ensure success.
The initiative aims to prepare a new strategic plan by conducting the 
necessary studies, establishing support departments, equipping work 
teams, and preparing workshops and awareness programs to support 
and facilitate the process of implementing the new strategic plan. 
Goals will also be set and indicators tracked to evaluate the 
performance of the corporation's transformation into a non-proﬁt 
institution.
The initiative's scope of work includes the following:
• Implementing the general strategy of the institution
• Initiating legal and regulatory arrangements to establish an 
independent, not-for-proﬁt entity
• Amending the framework and accounting practices in line with 
international standards
• Evaluating ﬁxed assets and determining their value
• Establishing a transformation ofﬁce for supervision until completion 
of the transformation into an independent, not-for-proﬁt entity
Initiative aims:
• Developing the performance of health workers in the intensive care 
unit and the departments concerned with organ donation and 
transplantation
• Electronic notiﬁcation
• Advanced training for healthcare providers involved in the initiative
• Optimizing the use of donors
The initiative's scope of work includes:
• Electronic incorporation of the intensive care units and establishing 
electronic registration through the website application
• Rehabilitation and training of medical coordinators, administrators, 
and initiative workers
101
Improve sustainability 
and ﬁnancial 
transparency 1-16-029-1219 
Establishment of 
uniﬁed electronic 
system
Increase clinical 
(medical) 
effectiveness
1-16-097-1230 Improving skills of 
ambulatory care 
providers
Improve 
sustainability and 
ﬁnancial 
transparency
1-16-027-1217 Tender for private 
sector submissions
 2.1.2
 Improve value of 
healthcare services
 2.1.2
 Improve value of 
healthcare services
 2.1.2
 Improve value of
healthcare services
102
Strategic pillars Initiative link to 
level 3 objective Initiative no. Initiative name
Current Initiatives
The initiative aims to develop and standardize procedures for investors 
and build a uniﬁed electronic system that achieves the efﬁciency and 
effectiveness of services that are carried out at the Food and Drug 
Authority. This will contribute to improving the speed and quality of 
transactions, supporting decisions and optimizing use of resources, as 
well as facilitating the process of communication, information 
exchange, decision-making and performance measurement.
The initiative's scope is to unify the process ﬂow, develop a general 
perception of the basic requirements, present recommendations to 
challenges, develop and analyze the requirements for each technical 
sector, and develop the technical infrastructure to build the uniﬁed 
electronic system.
The initiative aims to work on developing and improving the 
ambulatory skills and knowledge required for service providers.
The scope of work: 
• Build the capacities and skills of the ambulance staff and establish 
ﬁve highly qualiﬁed training centers that enable the Red Crescent to 
increase the annual training capacity
• Reduce the costs of assigning employees to the staff 
• Attract trainers from within the authority with experience and 
professional qualiﬁcations in emergency medical services to enable 
trainees to acquire scientiﬁc and practical skills in accordance with 
international standards 
• Improve quality by building capacities and skills in medical ambulance 
staff
• Raise community awareness in ﬁrst aid to deal with emergency cases, 
which reduces the ambulance requests in non-emergency cases, 
improving the overall value of health services
Several initiatives have been implemented recently aimed at addressing 
some of the issues of the current medical referral system to private 
sector facilities. For internal referrals, a committee has been 
established to purchase services from the private sector to enforce the 
guidelines for referral procedures and reduce referrals to the private 
sector by improving access to public sector medical facilities. 
Furthermore, the Ministry of Health has prepared an approved price 
list for treatment in private medical facilities, and contracted with a 
local claims management company to manage the purchase of health 
services from private providers.
103
Initiative description Leading party
Strategic pillars Initiative link to 
level 3 objective Initiative no. Initiative name
Current Initiatives
Improve sustainability 
and ﬁnancial 
transparency
1-16-029-1221 Creation of Track and 
Trace system
Safety in health 
facilities
 2.1.2
 Improve value of
healthcare services
1-16-028-1255 Implementation of 
initiatives supporting 
the healthcare strategy
 2.1.2
 Improve value of
healthcare services
Increase clinical 
(medical) 
effectiveness
 2.1.2
 Improve value of
healthcare services
1-16-028-1422 National Organ Failure 
Registry
104
Initiative description Leading party
The establishment of the electronic tracking system for 
pharmaceuticals to track their distribution and ensure their safety and 
availability within the Saudi market. Pharmaceuticals are tracked using 
a binary barcode.
The initiative aims to promote the implementation of the healthcare 
strategy, under which all initiatives related to the development of the 
health sector are included, as this strategy studies all health legislation 
and regulations, sets priorities and designs initiatives after meeting 
their requirements. More than 60 projects fall under the initiative to 
implement the Kingdom's healthcare strategy. Most notably: the 
project overseeing the balanced distribution of health facilities and 
services; and partnerships with non-proﬁt organizations such as the 
World Health Organization and the World Bank.
The scope of work includes:
• Reviewing existing health policies and regulations
• Identifying areas of duplication, conﬂicts, or overlaps between 
policies and systems
• Proposing a list of existing health policies and regulations to be 
modiﬁed or supplemented
• Proposing the list of required additional health policies and 
regulations
• Proposing ideas that would improve harmony between the existing 
health policies and systems
• Completing the draft national plan for inter-health referral
• Completing the national framework for health disaster management 
project 
The lack of a uniﬁed medical record for patients with organ failure and 
living organ donors is a challenge that makes it difﬁcult to study the size 
of the problem and develop future strategies to deal with patients with 
organ failure as required. Therefore, the initiative aims to establish an 
electronic system for a National Organ Failure Registry, which includes the 
following tasks: • Registration of patients with kidney failure, organ 
transplants, and organ donors • Follow up to establish the necessary 
procedures electronically
The system targets patients with organ failure, which contributes to 
achieving the level 3 strategic goal and strengthening protection against 
health risks, especially chronic non-communicable diseases that cause 
organic failure. This is achieved by archiving data and conducting analysis 
at the Saudi Center for Organ Transplantation, which involves:
• Identifying the size of the problem and the number of new patients 
• Improving the survival rate of transplant patients
• Improving the care of patients with terminal organ failure of the kidney, 
liver, heart and lung
• Evaluating the quality and performance of services provided to donors 
and transplant patients in line with WHO requirements 
• Promoting prevention against health risks, especially for chronic 
non-communicable diseases that cause organ failure such as renal and 
cardiovascular insufﬁciency due to diabetes, high blood pressure and obesity
105
Reduce the incidence 
of infectious diseases
Reduce the prevalence 
of risk factors for 
non-communicable 
diseases
Raise the level of 
preparedness for 
health disasters
1-16-027-0883 National Center for 
Disease Control and 
Prevention
 Reduce the prevalence
 of risk factors for
 non-communicable
diseases
1-16-027-0884               Health Research Center
2.1.3
 Promote prevention
against health risk
 2.1.3
 Promote prevention
against health risks
Strategic pillars Initiative link to 
level 3 objective Initiative no. Initiative name
Current Initiatives
106
The initiative aims to activate the functions and operation of the 
National Center for Disease Prevention and Control, contribute to the 
reduction of communicable and non-communicable diseases, monitor 
and prevent their spread, promote health, and conduct research and 
studies in the ﬁeld of prevention and control of communicable and 
non-communicable diseases.
Initiatives include: 
• Combatting Infectious Diseases Initiative, eg. tuberculosis, AIDS, viral 
hepatitis, inﬂuenza, emerging diseases such as the novel coronavirus 
(Covid-19), hemorrhagic fevers 
• Initiative for vector-borne diseases: eg. dengue, malaria, rabies 
• Non-communicable disease control initiative: eg. diabetes, obesity, 
smoking, cardiovascular disease, asthma, osteoporosis 
• Environment-related disease control initiative: all diseases resulting 
from the pollution of water, food and air 
• Health Promotion Initiative 
• Public Health Legislation Initiative which is related to health in all 
policies 
• International Health Regulations initiative
• Antimicrobial Resistance Initiative (ﬁghting antibiotic-resistant germs) 
• Healthy Cities Initiative 
• National laboratories with full scope for public health, including 
laboratories for genetic diseases, human genetics, epidemiological 
disease, common diseases, radioisotope and secondary calibration of 
radiometric devices 
• Health Surveys Initiative 
• Cancer Control Initiative: breast and colon cancer
The initiative aims to raise the level of health research in the Kingdom 
based on a coordinated national strategy and a funding framework. 
This is achieved through the establishment and operation of the Saudi 
National Institute of Health, which will manage the scientiﬁc health 
research activities on a national level across all sectors involved. This 
also involves:
• Identifying and updating health research priorities periodically to 
direct health research expenditures and raise efﬁciency
• Promoting the application of research regulations to protect the 
interests of individuals and society in the ﬁeld 
• Encouraging participation, innovation and creativity in research
• Contributing to the exchange and dissemination of knowledge 
• Beneﬁting from the outputs and recommendations of funded 
research to develop health policies and strategies to support public 
health and prevent health risks
Through the initiative, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia will be in a better 
position to address public health priorities, develop highly qualiﬁed 
talent, strengthen the infrastructure for health research and 
innovation, and contribute to the diversiﬁcation of the Kingdom's 
economy through research and innovation. 
Initiative description Leading party
107
Raise the level of 
preparedness for 
health disasters
1-16-027-0949 Preparedness for health 
emergencies
Reduce the prevalence 
of risk factors for 
non-communicable 
diseases
1-16-029-1231 Interactive awareness 
initiatives
Reduce the prevalence 
of risk factors for 
non-communicable 
diseases
1-16-028-1234 Initiatives of the National 
Cancer Center
 2.1.3
 Promote prevention
against health risks
 2.1.3
 Promote prevention
against health risks
 2.1.3
 Promote prevention
against health risks
Reduce the prevalence 
of risk factors for 
non-communicable 
diseases
1-16-029-1319 Pesticide Residue Inspection 
Centre 2.1.3
 Promote prevention
against health risks
Strategic pillars Initiative link to 
level 3 objective Initiative no. Initiative name
Current Initiatives
108
Despite the notable performance of the Saudi health sector in dealing 
with the novel coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic, the Kingdom seeks to 
improve local capabilities to respond to disasters and crises and to 
double specialized centers. Therefore this initiative aims to prepare and 
equip crisis and disaster management centers to face challenges 
through the provision of appropriate infrastructure including 
mechanical and electrical works, and technical infrastructure such as the 
Internet, wall screens, communications equipment, etc. The initiative 
targets all health areas and will contribute to achieving the strategic 
goal aimed at strengthening the prevention of risks as well as raising 
the Kingdom's readiness level to deal with various crises.
The initiative aims to raise awareness among community groups by 
launching specialized awareness campaigns based on the needs of the 
following groups: school students 7-12 years old, housewives, patients 
with chronic diseases and youths 18-22 years old. The initiative will also 
promote the role and regulations of the Food and Drug Authority.
This initiative aims to develop and improve the services provided to 
oncology patients in the Kingdom through the development and 
application of policies and regulations in line with scientiﬁc and medical 
best practices in the ﬁeld. This also involves strengthening the role of 
the National Oncology Center to assume greater responsibilities 
towards the target group (oncology patients) in the Kingdom, as well 
as contributing to the development of policies and measures to 
enhance the role of early detection of cancer as well as raise the level of 
awareness in the community.
 Establishing, equipping and operating laboratories for examining
pesticide residues in vegetables and fruits
Initiative description Leading party
109
Reduce the prevalence 
of risk factors for 
non-communicable 
diseases
1-16-029-1220 Creation of halal center
Promote optimal road 
infrastructure 1-16-031-0914
Road safety initiative to 
reduce road trafﬁc deaths
Promote the concept 
of awareness, 
education and 
community 
participation
12832
Trafﬁc safety for school 
students –instilling trafﬁc 
culture in the hearts of 
youth
 2.1.3
 Promote prevention
against health risks
2.3.4
Enhance trafﬁc safety
2.3.4
Enhance trafﬁc safety
Strategic pillars Initiative link to 
level 3 objective Initiative no. Initiative name
Current Initiatives
110
Several procedures are involved in issuing halal food certiﬁcates, and 
granting these numerous permits causes signiﬁcant delays. Therefore, 
the situation requires unifying procedures and centralizing authority.
The initiative aims to establish a center that deals with food and halal 
products in all its aspects, and to grant certiﬁcates. Scope of work for 
the initiative: 
• Requesting the approval of the High Commissioner
• Appointing a team to establish the center
• Equipping the temporary headquarters 
• Ofﬁcial approval of the center’s operations and procedures, technical 
committees, institutional identity, accreditation and launch
This initiative aims to reduce the rate of road deaths in the Kingdom by 
addressing road problems and dangerous sites (sites where deaths and 
accidents are frequent), which are represented by the high number of 
accidents on the road network. The initiative will also strengthen 
cooperation with government agencies, promote the sharing of 
information and identify hazardous sites, as well as coordinating the 
rapid response time among the concerned authorities, raising the level 
of awareness by implementing campaigns on road safety, and 
adopting the governance of the National Road Safety Center as a 
coordinating body that links the parties related to trafﬁc safety. 
This initiative aims to enhance the trafﬁc culture of school students 
through training by male and female teachers using various tools such 
as: training bags and trafﬁc safety boxes containing virtual trafﬁc 
environments; educational materials, whether images, videos or 
models; and the use of driving simulators and seat belt devices. 
Students are also educated about mobile awareness through school 
campaigns.
Initiative description Leading party
111
hstp@hstp.gov.sa
Contact
For more information:
All rights reserved. Health Sector Transformation Program 2021
hstp.gov.sa