SaudiMOH Saudi_MohSaudiMOH937 MOHPortalwww.moh.gov.sa
Legal Regulations for
Telehealth Services
Ministry of Health-Saudi Arabia
This Document valid till March 2022
Clinical Governance Directorate – DHCOE
Legal Regulations for Telehealth Services
SaudiMOH Saudi_MohSaudiMOH937 MOHPortalwww.moh.gov.sa
1

SaudiMOH Saudi_MohSaudiMOH937 MOHPortalwww.moh.gov.sa
2
Abstract
The Royal Order (no. 47455) issued on 9/8/1441 AH, makes an exception to the 
provisions of Article 13 of Law of Practicing Health Professions issued by Royal De-
cree No. (M/59) on 4/11/1426 AH, that the health practitioner may conduct exami -
nations or treatment through the services of telehealth in homes and workplaces, 
in accordance with the regulations set by the Ministry of Health. Accordingly, these 
regulations are made pursuant to the direction to the Ministry of Health to set the 
regulations relating to telehealth.
1. Definitions 
 (1) The following words and phrases, unless the context otherwise requires, shall have the follow-
ing meanings:
	(a)	Credentialing	 is	the	process	of	obtaining,	verifying,	and	assessing	the	qualification	of	a	health	
care professional to provide care or services in or for a health care facility.
 (b) Health care facility is an institution or an organization licensed to provide health care diagnosis 
and treatment services within the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. 
 (c) Health care professional is an individual licensed to provide health care diagnosis and treatment 
or services related thereto within the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and includes physicians, dentists, 
nurses, and other health practitioners licensed to practice the health profession in accordance with 
Law of Practicing Health Professions.
 (d) Ministry of health is the Ministry of Health of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
 (e) Permitted telehealth services are the services allowed to be provided as a telehealth service 
within the scope of the facility’s license and includes clinical services. 
	(f)	 Privileging	is	the	process	by	which	a	specific	scope	and	content	of	a	patent	care	services	are	
authorized for a health care professional by a health care facility based on the individual’s creden-
tials and performance. 
 (g) Tele-assistance is the use of telecommunications technology to give support or aid to a patient 
or another health care professional and it includes the synchronous remote medical support pro -
vided by a health care professional to assist another health care professional to render a medical 
service.
 (h) Tele-consultation is the use of telecommunications technology to meet a doctor who is spe -
cially trained to advice the patient or other doctors about an illness or its treatment and includes 
remote medical opinion requested by a patient to a health care professional and seeking of medical 
opinion other than the medical opinion provided by a previous health care professional.
SaudiMOH Saudi_MohSaudiMOH937 MOHPortalwww.moh.gov.sa
3
	(i)	 Tele-diagnosis	is	use	of	telecommunications	technology	for	the	identification	of	the	nature	of	an	
illness or other problem by examination of symptoms.
 (j) Telehealth is the use of telecommunications technology to deliver health-related services and 
information that support patient care, administrative activities, and health education. 
 (k) Telehealth Centre is the Centre for Excellence in Digital Health, Ministry of Health, Kingdom of 
Saudi Arabia. 
 (l) Telehealth services includes tele-screening, tele-triage, tele-consultation, tele-diagnosis, tele-
assistance, tele-treatment, and tele-monitoring
 (m) Tele-monitoring means the remote medical monitoring of a patient based on the medical and 
health data collected by a patient or a health care professional or a device. 
 (n) Tele-screening is the use of telecommunications technology to conduct tests or examinations 
to discover illness or injury in a patient.
 (o) Tele-treatment is the use of telecommunications technology to cure a person of an illness or 
injury.
 (p) Tele-triage is the use of telecommunication technology for the assignment of degrees of ur -
gency to wounds and illnesses to decide the order of treatment of a large number of patients or 
casualties.
2. Objective
 (1) The object of these regulations shall be to set the standards for all telehealth services and to 
monitor compliance with the standards by health care facilities and health care professionals within 
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
3. Scope and Applicability
 (1) These regulations shall be applicable to all health care facilities and health care professionals 
associated with health care facilities, licensed by Ministry of Health to provide telehealth services.
 (2) These regulations shall be in force until 31st December 2021. 
4. Practice of Telehealth Services
 (1) Telehealth services shall be practised only by health care facilities that are licensed by the Min-
istry of Health. 
 (2) All health care facilities should have telehealth services for rendering care.
 (3) The health care facilities should comply with all the laws and regulations issued by Ministry of 
Health from time to time.
SaudiMOH Saudi_MohSaudiMOH937 MOHPortalwww.moh.gov.sa
4
 (4) An entity providing telehealth services which is not licensed as a health care facility in the King-
dom of Saudi Arabia shall obtain a licence to be allowed to practice telehealth from the Telehealth 
Centre. 
 (5) All legal requirements applied to a health care facility shall be applied to an entity providing 
telehealth services.
5. Requirements for providing medical care in Tele-health
 (1) A health care facility involved in telehealth services shall comply with the Ministry of Health re -
quirements for licensure and other requirements necessary for its operation, while licenses will be 
granted as per the below:
 a) Public sector: Pre-approvals shall be obtained from Digital Health Centre of Excellence prior 
activating Tele-health services
 b) Private sector:  Licenses are granted before Tele-health services activation through the Licens-
ing Department of the Ministry of Health in line with the requirements of Digital Health Center of 
Excellence. 
 (2) A health care facility shall employ the minimum number of physicians for the provision of tele -
health services as per the Ministry of Health policy for licensing health facilities.
 (3) A health care facility shall install equipment, devices and technologies approved by Ministry of 
Health needed for the delivery of telehealth services including software and peripheral devices.
 (4) A health care facility shall have a written contract with another health care facility where the 
telehealth service provision entails two or more entities.
 (5) The contract should detail out the roles and responsibilities of each party and should be in 
alignment with the law and regulations of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
 (6) The health care facility shall maintain a record of all physicians and other health care profession-
als engaged in telehealth services.
 (7) The health care facility shall be responsible to ensure that the partnering health facility, which is 
not subject to the jurisdiction of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, is made aware of all the applicable 
laws and regulations for telehealth services and assure compliance across both jurisdictions.
 (8) The health care facility shall have in place policies relating to telehealth service description with 
scope	of	services	available,	patient	identification,	selection	and	risk	assessment	and	patient	con-
sent.
6. Requirements for health care professionals 
 (1) Telehealth services related to diagnosis and treatment shall be led by a physician.
 (2) Telehealth services may be practiced by all types of health care professionals for which they are 
SaudiMOH Saudi_MohSaudiMOH937 MOHPortalwww.moh.gov.sa
5
credentialed and privileged.
 (3) All legal requirements applicable to health care professionals practising within the jurisdiction of 
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia shall be applicable to the practice of telehealth.
 (4) Health care professionals shall be allowed to practice telehealth services across all types of 
health care providers in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
 (5) Health care professionals practicing telehealth services may be remunerated for the practice.
7. Credentialing and Privileging 
 (1) The practice of telehealth shall be restricted to the healthcare professionals who are creden -
tialed to practice within the jurisdiction of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
 (2) The licensed physicians, nurses and allied health professionals must be privileged to provide 
telehealth services as per the Ministry of Health requirements for Clinical Privileging.
 (3) Telehealth services must comply with laws and regulations of KSA and work within the scope of 
their license, speciality and granted privileges.
 (4) Physicians providing telehealth services shall comply with the professional licensure require -
ments.
 (5) Nurses and other health care professionals may provide telehealth services related to diagnosis 
and treatment under the direction and clinical supervision of the treating physician.
 (6) A healthcare facility licensed by the Ministry of Health for providing telehealth services shall 
privilege	its	staff	to	provide	telehealth	services	by	speciality	and	document	it	in	the	staff’s	records.
 (7) The health care facility providing telehealth services shall be accredited from an internationally 
recognised accreditation organisation for telehealth services within 18 months or such extended 
time period as may be prescribed by the Telehealth Centre, from the date of commencement of 
telehealth services.
8. Insurance Coverage 
 (1) Provision shall be made for the health insurance coverage to include telehealth services.
 (2) Private health insurance shall provide coverage of telehealth services with at least a parity of 
public coverage and funding in telemedicine services.
9. Liability and Malpractice
 (1) In a telehealth service involving two or more healthcare professionals, each healthcare profes -
sional shall be responsible based on their individual contribution.  
 (2) Liability shall be decided on a case-to-case basis after due investigation.
SaudiMOH Saudi_MohSaudiMOH937 MOHPortalwww.moh.gov.sa
6
 (3) The health care facility shall ensure malpractice insurance is in place throughout the duration of 
the telehealth service. 
 (4) Telehealth services rendered by a healthcare professional shall be covered by malpractice in -
surance.
 10. Telehealth Centre
 (1) The Telehealth Centre shall support, monitor, and evaluate the implementation and develop -
ment of telehealth services in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.
 (2) The Telehealth Centre shall set the standard for telehealth services, monitoring compliance with 
the standards by health care facilities and professionals and conducting evaluations relating to 
telehealth services.
 (3) Health care facilities and professionals practising telehealth in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia 
shall declare themselves to Telehealth Centre through an online form and update it annually.
 (4) Health care facilities shall provide an annual report to the Telehealth Centre on the status of 
implementation and impact of telehealth services in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. 
 (5) Health care facilities shall use medical devices in telehealth services approved by the Saudi 
Food and Drug Authority. Devices not regulated by the Saudi Food and Drug Authority shall be ap-
proved by the Telehealth Centre on a case-to-case basis after due investigation.
 (6) If two or more healthcare facilities provide a collaborated telehealth service, they shall enter into 
a written agreement and a copy of the same shall be submitted to the Telehealth Centre.
11. Health information and Identity
 (1) The health care facility shall provide for secure and private workspace to safeguard patient 
privacy which includes privacy of personal information, privacy of personal communications and 
privacy of consulting space.  
 (2) Telehealth services shall be compliant with the health information exchange policy as applicable 
within the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, including all relevant data security, privacy requirements and 
interoperability frameworks.
	(3)	Health	 care	facility	and	professionals	shall	have	sufficient	evidence	to	identity	the	patient	before	
and during the telehealth service.
 (4) Healthcare professionals shall have access to all relevant patient health and medical informa -
tion relevant to the practice of telehealth services.
12. Patient rights and Dispute Resolution
	(1)	The	 health	care	facility	offering	telehealth	services	shall	obtain	informed	consent	before	the	
commencement of the telehealth service from the patient and the same shall be signed by patient 
SaudiMOH Saudi_MohSaudiMOH937 MOHPortalwww.moh.gov.sa
7
and	available	online	for	verification.
 (2) Informed consent signed shall be valid for telehealth services rendered by the health care facil-
ity.
 (3) The standard informed consent form shall include telehealth services.
 (4) The health care facility shall make a provision for patients to receive relevant education on tele-
health services.
 (5) Patients shall be given the right to refuse or cancel any participation in telehealth services at any 
time without the need to provide any reason.
 (6) The health care facility shall make a provision for patients to make a compliant about a tele -
health service which shall be shared with the Telehealth Centre at regular intervals.
 (7) Any user of telehealth services can register a complaint using the provisions provided by the 
health care facility.
	(8)	The	 health	care	facility	shall	file	quarterly	reports	to	the	Telehealth	Centre	with	details	about	the	
number	of	complaints	filed,	the	types	of	complaints,	the	process	by	which	the	complaints	were	
redressed and the outcome of the complaints.
	(9)	The	 Telehealth	Centre	may	directly	receive	complaints	from	the	users	of	telehealth	services	filed	
in the prescribed manner.
13. Permitted Services
 (1) Permitted telehealth services include scheduling appointments, medical assessment, medical 
advice, consultation, treatment, referral, peer-to-peer sessions, therapy, laboratory testing, diag -
nostics, surgery, monitoring chronic conditions, counselling, prescription of medicines, dispensing 
of medicines and exchange of medical reports.
 (2) The list of permitted services shall be revised by the Telehealth Centre from time to time.
