Telehealth Application
Guidelines
Preface                                                                                                                       3
Introduction                                                                                                             5
Glossary                                                                                                                       8
Abbreviations                                                                                                           10  
Initiation of virtual practice                                                                                       12
Health Information and Identity:                                                                             13
Liability and Malpractice:                                                                                       17
Patients’ Rights and Dispute Resolution:                                                                   20
Clinical service continuity of Care                                                                                  23
Insurance coverage:                                                                                                 23
Technical aspects of telehealth:                                                                             23
Telehealth Data Management:                                                                                       25
Scope of Virtual practice                                                                                       31
◦  Service & application                                                                                       31
◦  Tele-consultation                                                                                                 31
◦  Tele-diagnosis                                                                                                 31
◦  Remote patient monitoring                                                                             31
◦  Tele-management                                                                                                 31
◦  Tele-surgery                                                                                                 31
◦  Tele-assistance                                                                                                 31
◦  Tele-expertise                                                                                                 31
◦  Tele-education                                                                                                 31
◦  Cross-border access                                                                                       31
◦  Emerging technology                                                                                       31
Service and application:                                                                                                 31
Tele-consultation:                                                                                                           34
Tele-Diagnosis:                                                                                                           38
Remote patient monitoring:                                                                                       42
Tele-management:                                                                                                 44
Tele-Surgery:                                                                                                           47
Tele-assistance:                                                                                                           51
Tele-expertise:                                                                                                           54
Tele-education:                                                                                                           57
Cross-border access:                                                                                                 60
Emerging Technologies in Telehealth:                                                                   64
Appendix:                                                                                                                         66
Telehealth Application
Guidelines
Telehealth Application Guidelines
Table of Content
Contents
Intellectual Property Rights
All rights are reserved to the National health information Center (NHIC), Saudi Health 
Council. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or 
by any means without permission in writing from NHIC. 
Acknowledgment
The development of this guideline was greatly supported by the following 
organizations/ individuals:
The Saudi Health Council (SHC).
Scientiﬁc committee advisors of the National health information Center, Riyadh, Saudi 
Arabia.
The national committee of clinical guidelines for telehealth.
Code of ethics for patient privacy and conﬁdentiality
The NHIC aims to provide quality, knowledge and integrated services to the Saudi 
health system assuring to meet the standards of global best practices. NHIC supports 
the privacy and conﬁdentiality of health information by providing standards and 
regulations and best practices in the ﬁeld of digital health.
Telehealth Application Guidelines
3

Introduction
Telehealth is “the use of electronic information and communication technologies to 
support virtual clinical healthcare practice, patient and professional health-related 
education, public health and health administration” (1 ).  It allows long-distance patient 
and clinician contact, care, advice, education, intervention, monitoring, and remote care 
pathway delivery (2 ). When in rural settings, lack of transport, a lack of mobility, 
conditions due to outbreaks, epidemics or pandemics, decreased funding, or a lack of 
staﬀ, restricted access to care, telehealth may bridge the gap(3 ) as well as provide 
distance-learning; meetings, supervision, and presentations between practitioners; 
online information and health data management and healthcare system integration(4). 
In the light of the global and local acceleration of the adoption of telehealth technology, 
which has proven to facilitate the provision of healthcare to everyone regardless of 
geographical location and assisted in preventing the spread of diseases mainly during 
the covid-19 pandemic. This adoption has shown a great value to everyone including 
healthcare professionals, healthcare facilities and patients. However, it has raised a 
great risk regarding the safety of the provision of healthcare and required the 
intervention to organize the practice to ensure the overall safety of patients and the 
privacy of their health information.
Therefore, this document comes as an integral document to organize the practice of 
telehealth in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to provide safe and eﬃcient telehealth 
practice. It aims to create guidelines for the practice of telehealth for healthcare 
professionals, virtual hospitals and mobile apps. Accordingly, it covers the requirements 
for telehealth services, the basic steps when using telehealth services, patient rights and 
technical requirements of telehealth services. In addition, this document is not 
considered as a clinical guideline for any speciﬁc specialty nor a disease, but it aims to 
help Healthcare professional (HCP) using telehealth technologies to provide the best 
care to patients.
Telehealth Application Guidelines
5
Selecting patients for telehealth:  
Physicians should determine which patients are suitable for telehealth based on 
available resources, technology and the urgency of medical 
care. Physicians providing telehealth consultation services should determine whether a 
telehealth consultation is the most appropriate type of consultation for each patient. 
The decision to use telehealth incorporates the following factors: 
Clinical: continuity of care, shared care, and the best model of care for the patient. 
Practical: availability of appropriate technology and patient-end support. The quality of 
the technology at the remote site will play a signiﬁcant role in the information gained 
during the clinical consultation. 
Note: all content provided in this document are subject to evolve for their improvement 
in line with scientiﬁc literature or suggested comments. These guidelines are subject to 
review and update on a yearly basis. Any changes will be communicated by the NHIC.
Telehealth Application Guidelines
6
Glossary
Telehealth
(1)
Telemedicine
 A telehealth
 solution
 provider
(TSoP)
 A telehealth
 service
 provider
(TSeP)
 licensed
 Health care
 professional
The use of electronic information and communication technologies to support 
long-distance virtual clinical healthcare practice, patient and professional 
health-related education, public health and health administration.
the use of medical information exchanged from one site to another 
via electronic communications to improve patients' health status.
A digital enabler to virtual care services. The tool may be a hardware and/or a 
software, and may be a medical device.
An entity providing a remote clinical health service.
Anyone authorized to practice health professions. This includes the following 
categories: physicians and dentists, pharmacology specialists, health 
technicians (in radiology, nursing, anesthesia, laboratory, pharmacy, optics, 
epidemiology, prostheses, physiotherapy, dental care and installation, CT 
imaging, nuclear therapy, laser, and operations), psychologists,  social 
workers, nutritionists, public health, midwifery, ambulance, speech and 
hearing treatment, occupational rehabilitation, occupational therapy, medical 
physics, and other health professions that are An agreement between the 
Ministry of Health, ministry of human resources and social development and 
the Saudi Commission for Health Specialties.
A healthcare professional who delivers care and services to the sick and ailing 
either directly as doctors and nurses or indirectly as aides, helpers, laboratory 
technicians.
An adult who is considered legally responsible for the care and custody of a 
minor or another adult determined to be unable to provide self-care or 
otherwise incompetent.
A Legal documented process regulates the conduct of medical relationship 
between the patient and the healthcare professional.
health worker
 Medical
Guardian
 Informed
consent
Glossary
Te r m Definition
Glossary
Telehealth Application Guidelines
8
 Biomedical
 device as per
 FDA/SFDA
standards
 licensed
organization
 Physiologic
monitoring
 Remote
 patient
 monitoring
The FDA categorizes medical devices into one of three classes – Class I, II, 
or III – based on their risks and the regulatory controls necessary to 
provide a reasonable assurance of safety and eﬀectiveness. 
Class I: Common, low risk devices with low complexity
Class II: moderate risk, partially implanted devices with more complexity
Class III: high-risk, fully implanted devices.
Telemedicine or telehealth organization that is licensed for the purpose of 
administering services in the scope of telemedicine or telehealth.
Is the use of digital technologies to monitor and capture medical and other 
health data from patients and electronically transmit this information to 
healthcare professionals for assessment and, when necessary, 
recommendations and instructions.
The use of synchronous or asynchronous electronic information and 
communication technology to collect personal health information and medical 
data from a patient at an originating site that is transmitted to a healthcare 
professional at a distant site for use in the treatment and management of 
medical conditions that require frequent monitoring.
The asynchronous transmission of a patient's medical information from a 
healthcare professional at an originating site to a healthcare professional at a 
distant site.
The evaluation of all processes and procedures in case of any dispute that 
requires review if the medical practice is following the best practice. 
Unidentiﬁed use of data for any purpose such as research, analysis, AI, data 
mining.
refers to anything that is “on premise” or “on-prem” such as a hard drive, ﬂash 
drive, local ﬁle server, or Network Attached Storage drive (NAS drive)
A HCP in a tele-assistance encounter, who provides a technical assistance 
remotely.
A HCP in a tele- expertise encounter, who provides an expert medical opinion 
remotely.
Patient prioritization and categorization according to medical and 
management needs, such as illness/injury, severity/complexity, prognosis and 
resource availability and referral to specialized care as indicated by case.
A medical diagnostic testing outside a clinical laboratory can be near or at the 
patient site of care.
Store-and-
 forward
 technology
Medico-legal
 Secondary
use of data
 Local data
storage
 The assisting
HCP
Expert HCP
 Triage of
patients
Point-of-car
e testing
Glossary
Telehealth Application Guidelines
9
Artiﬁcial Intelligence 
Computerized Tomography
Council of Health Insurance 
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
Chest X-Ray
Data Loss Prevention 
Health Catalyst Data Operating System
Electrocardiogram
Electronic Medical Records
Far End Camera Control
Electronic Health Record
Food and Drug Administration/ Saudi Food and Drug Authority
Healthcare professional (referred to consulted/consulting, accepting/referring) 
this has been speciﬁed within the document.
Intensive Care Unit
AI
CT
CHI
COPD
CXR
DLP
DOSTM
ECG
EMR
EHR
FECC
FDA/SFDA
HCP
CST Communications, Space & Technology Commission
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
National Data Management Office
National Health Information Center
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Ministry of Health
Medical Record Number
Saudi Health Information Exchange
Service Level Agreement
Remote Patient Monitoring
Tele-Assistance
Tele-Consultation
A telehealth service provider
A telehealth solution provider
Vendor Neutral Archive
The Saudi Commission for Health Specialties
picture archiving and communication system
Point-of-care testing
ICU
KSA
NDMO
NHIC
MRI
MoH
MRN
SeHe
SLA
RPM
TLA
TLC
TSeP
TSoP
VNA
SCFHS
PACS
POCT
Abbreviations
Telehealth Application Guidelines
10

Initiation of virtual practice
Health information and identity
Liability and malpractice
Patient rights and dispute resolution
Clinical service continuity of care
Insurance coverage
Technical aspects of telehealth
Telehealth data management
Telehealth Application Guidelines
12
Health Information and Identity:
Provider-Patient Relationship:
It is crucial that a valid patient-physician relationship must be established before the 
provision of telemedicine services, through (5–13):
The provider agrees to undertake diagnosis and treatment of the patient, and the 
patient, or a medical guardian for the patient, agrees to be treated- whether or not there 
has been an in-person encounter between the patient and the provider.
The Provider Must:
Verify and authenticate the patient’s identity by checking at admission, registration & 
presentation at every encounter.
Use a patient identiﬁcation across all health information systems in order to support 
patient uniﬁed records.
Treat a patient via telemedicine and conﬁrm key identiﬁers, to ensure the proper 
medico-legal documentation, medical notes and electronic systems used match the 
patient in process of an intended care.
Conﬁdence of the HCP in assessing the patient condition and establishing the medical 
diagnosis without the need for in-house physical examination that could not be 
achieved with the virtual physical examination and investigation solutions. 
Check the patient’s identity and match it with their intended care throughout their 
continuity of care. Also, ensure this has been correctly documented.
Follow key essential approved identiﬁers that can be used to ensure the right patient is 
matched with the right procedure. These include:
Name (family and given names) , Governmental ID, Date of birth ,Gender
Medical record number, or Individual healthcare identiﬁer
7.   Conﬁrming that telehealth/telemedicine services are appropriate for that   patient’s 
individual situation and medical needs.
8. Evaluating the indication, appropriateness and safety of any prescription in 
keeping with best practice guidelines and any formulary limitations that apply to the 
electronic interaction.
9. Documenting the clinical evaluation and prescription.
Telehealth Application Guidelines
13
Introduction
Telehealth is “the use of electronic information and communication technologies to 
support virtual clinical healthcare practice, patient and professional health-related 
education, public health and health administration” (1 ).  It allows long-distance patient 
and clinician contact, care, advice, education, intervention, monitoring, and remote care 
pathway delivery (2 ). When in rural settings, lack of transport, a lack of mobility, 
conditions due to outbreaks, epidemics or pandemics, decreased funding, or a lack of 
staﬀ, restricted access to care, telehealth may bridge the gap(3 ) as well as provide 
distance-learning; meetings, supervision, and presentations between practitioners; 
online information and health data management and healthcare system integration(4). 
In the light of the global and local acceleration of the adoption of telehealth technology, 
which has proven to facilitate the provision of healthcare to everyone regardless of 
geographical location and assisted in preventing the spread of diseases mainly during 
the covid-19 pandemic. This adoption has shown a great value to everyone including 
healthcare professionals, healthcare facilities and patients. However, it has raised a 
great risk regarding the safety of the provision of healthcare and required the 
intervention to organize the practice to ensure the overall safety of patients and the 
privacy of their health information.
Therefore, this document comes as an integral document to organize the practice of 
telehealth in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia to provide safe and eﬃcient telehealth 
practice. It aims to create guidelines for the practice of telehealth for healthcare 
professionals, virtual hospitals and mobile apps. Accordingly, it covers the requirements 
for telehealth services, the basic steps when using telehealth services, patient rights and 
technical requirements of telehealth services. In addition, this document is not 
considered as a clinical guideline for any speciﬁc specialty nor a disease, but it aims to 
help Healthcare professional (HCP) using telehealth technologies to provide the best 
care to patients.
Healthcare Professional (HCP) Identity:
HCP should disclose his or her identity and applicable credential(s) to the patient; and 
obtain appropriate informed consent after any relevant disclosures regarding the 
delivery models and treatment methods or limitations, including any special informed 
consents regarding the use of telehealth technologies. 
Informed consent in telehealth practice:
A Legal documented process regulates the conduct of medical relationship between the 
patient and the healthcare professional or the treatment of the healthcare facility 
according to the laws, regulations and medical requirements. Informed consent 
documentation aims to explain the elements of the treatment agreement conducted 
between the patients and the HCP or the healthcare facility. Further, it guarantees the 
compliance of the parties with the non-emergency treatment agreement and resolves 
the conﬂict between the parties to the agreement by explaining the rights, duties, and 
obligations of each party towards the medical procedure taken and determined in 
advance. Moreover, it explains the method, mechanism, outcome, and possible 
complications of the procedure.
Informing the patient about telehealth & obtaining the consent:
Before conducting a telehealth consultation when applicable, physicians should ensure 
patients understand how the consultation will proceed. This may include: 
1. Providing the patient with plain language information about the intended telehealth 
service. 
2. Informing patients of the other available care options. 
3. Informing patients of any out-of-pocket charges for telehealth consultations, 
compared to other available options, if applicable.
HCP may need to liaise with the patient-end health worker or related caregiver to ensure 
the patient is suﬃciently informed. In cases where there is no health worker at the 
patient end, the HCP will need to ensure that the patient has been given adequate 
information regarding the telehealth consultation. 
Telehealth Application Guidelines
14
Seeking patient consent:
1. HCPs should verify that patients have consented to participate in the telehealth 
consultation. 
2. In cases where the patient is not competent and does not have the capacity to give 
consent, consent should be obtained in the same way as in a face-to-face 
consultation.
3. The HCP or patient-end health worker may have to arrange for consent to be given 
by a family member or friend who has the requisite legal authority (for example, 
enduring guardianship) to give consent on the patient’s behalf. 
4. In cases where a recording is to be used for education or assessment purposes, the 
patient should be informed of this and give consent to how the recording is to be 
used. The patient should be told the reasons why the consultation is recorded, how 
it will be stored and for how long.
5. Patient verbal and written consent is documented.
Privacy and conﬁdentiality of health information:
In compliance with the Saudi personal data protection law which is based on ten 
governance principles (Appendix A)(14). Telehealth consultations should be private and 
conﬁdential, and physicians should have processes in place to facilitate this as per 
standard face-to-face consultations. The patient’s privacy and conﬁdentiality should be 
maintained at all times. The patient’s privacy is protected by considering what risks 
there are to privacy when using telehealth, and developing procedures to manage such 
risks. 
Telehealth Application Guidelines
15
Requirements of Telehealth Data Management:
1. Activate data governance (operating model) that insures data sharing across 
organizations are done securely and safely. This should comply with national data 
protection laws and regulations in case of a national scope. Otherwise, all relevant laws 
and regulations in case of multi-jurisdictional telehealth scope. 
2. Provide data analysis means that enhance telehealth care.
3. Provide immediate access to data at the bedside or in Emergency department. 
4. Decentralized and hybrid systems of healthcare data management improve 
treatment between medical centers with fully synchronized medical records.
5. Cloud computing systems and other emerging technologies allow clinics and 
hospitals to oﬄoad the majority of their data into a centralized hub that can be more 
secure and less expensive. This should be in compliance with NCA and NDMO policies 
regarding data storage and cloud computing
6. Automated cloud data allows for automatic policy-based cleanings, which allows 
for the deletion of irrelevant data to keep more space free.
7. Improved data management helps in reduction of patient costs and leads to a 
better business and private decisions making.
8. Creation of a more streamlined information’s exchange and enhancing patient 
service and security
9. Ensuring the quality and interoperability of information. 
Data Management Best Practices for Hospitals and Medical Facilities:
Implementing accurate data management systems is imperative to ensure the eﬃcient 
storage and transfer of patients' information. Data management best practices also 
improve the conﬁdentiality, reliability and comprehensiveness of this information.
To reap the beneﬁts of exceptional data governance, hospitals and medical facilities must 
work together to better manage, organize, protect and transfer information between 
patients and providers. 
The following are few key ways via which healthcare facilities (hospitals or clinics) can best 
practice medical data management.
Telehealth Application Guidelines
16
Liability and Malpractice:
Responsibility/Liability in the course of telehealth is a shared responsibility between the 
healthcare facility, the HCP and the patient-end health worker. Each healthcare 
professional shall be responsible based on their individual contribution to make 
appropriate management and legal decisions.
The legal basis and requirements relating the medico-legal professional responsibility is 
subject to the decision on a case-to-case after thorough review. 
Responsibility/Liability:
1. The healthcare facility should be licensed to perform Telehealth services.
2. The healthcare facility shall ensure presence of governing policy and guidelines is in 
place throughout the duration of the telehealth service.
3. All HCP involved in telehealth practice must be fully educated and aware about the 
policy and guidelines that cover the telehealth services governing guidelines on 
national basis and within the healthcare facility.
4. The HCP liability will be assessed based on provided information during 
consultation.
5. In a telehealth service involving two or more healthcare professionals, each 
healthcare professional shall be responsible based on their individual contribution. 
(Provider to provider model).
6. The patient’s site referring HCP is fully responsible to treat the patient within his 
clinical capacity and provide the best available healthcare service at that moment. In 
certain cases, when further medical opinion becomes essential, telehealth service 
might support to provide a higher optimum care. 
7. The accepting HCP should accept the professional responsibility in providing the 
intended healthcare service to the referring HCP .
8. The HCP should access all information needed before proceeding with telehealth 
consultation.
Telehealth Application Guidelines
17
9. In a telehealth service involving two or more healthcare professionals, each 
healthcare professional shall be responsible based on their individual contribution
•  The responsibility is divided based on each HCP contribution 
•  The responsibility is subject to the limit of practice
•  The responsibility is subject to the privileges Specialty, level of privilege and level 
of credentials and speciﬁc case situation.
•  The accepting HCP is responsible to make the appropriate clinical decision, 
treatment plan and the appropriate care pathway based on the accessibility of the 
information.
•  The referring HCP is responsible to conduct the consulted HCP clinical decision, 
treatment plan and the appropriate care pathway based on his/her clinical capacity 
and the availability of the resources.
•  Medical documentation should be followed.
10. If Store-and-forward “asynchronous” consult used, liability will be fully on the 
consulted doctor except in second opinion situations. Patient consent does not declare 
the doctor from liability associated with medical malpractice.
11. In a direct and live services “synchronous” (doctor-to-patient) are provided (no 
third party or assistance at the referring site), the consulting doctor accepts full 
responsibility (and potential liability) for the patient’s care.  
Telehealth Application Guidelines
18
Credentialing and privileging:
1. The practice of telehealth shall be restricted to the healthcare professionals who are 
credentialed to practice within the jurisdiction of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (18). 
2. The registered and classiﬁed physicians, nurses and allied health professionals must be 
privileged to provide telehealth services. 
3. Privileging is an internal process implemented within a healthcare facility for the 
purpose of verifying and integrating the training and experience of the healthcare 
professional within the scope of telehealth services oﬀered by the facility.
4. The originating site may choose to use the credentialing and privileging decision from 
the distant site to make a ﬁnal privileging decision. If this option is chosen, the 
organization must ensure the delineation of privileges granted at the originating site 
only reﬂect those services that will be provided to that entity.
5. Telehealth services must comply with laws and regulations of KSA and work within the 
scope of their license, specialty and granted privileges. 
6. Healthcare professionals providing telehealth services shall comply with the 
professional registration and classiﬁcation requirements. 
7. Nurses and other healthcare professionals may provide telehealth services related to 
diagnosis and treatment based on their credentials and privileges given to them by the 
credentialing and privileging committee within their healthcare facility. 
8. A healthcare facility licensed by the MoH for providing telehealth services shall privilege 
its staﬀ to provide telehealth services by specialty and document it in the staﬀ’s 
records. 
9. The healthcare facility providing telehealth services is preferred to be accredited by a 
recognized accreditation organization for telehealth services. 
10. The license of a telehealth service or solution can be revoked in case of medical 
errors. This decision should be preceded by the responsible licensing entity evaluation 
and investigation.
Telehealth Application Guidelines
19
Patients’ Rights and Dispute Resolution:
Patient’s Bill of Rights:
1. The patient has the right to considerate and respectful care.
2. The patient has the right to and is encouraged to obtain from physicians and other direct 
caregivers relevant, current, and understandable information concerning diagnosis, 
treatment, and prognosis.
3. Except in emergencies when the patient lacks decision-making capacity and the need 
for treatment is urgent, the patient is entitled to the opportunity to discuss and request 
information related to the speciﬁc procedures and/or treatments, the risks involved, the 
possible length of recuperation, and the medically reasonable alternatives and their 
accompanying risks and beneﬁts.
4. Patients have the right to know the identity of physicians, nurses, and others involved in 
their care, as well as when those involved are students, residents, or other trainees.
5. The patient has the right to know the immediate and long-term ﬁnancial implications of 
treatment choices, insofar as they are known.
6. The patient has the right to make decisions about the plan of care prior to and during the 
course of treatment and to refuse a recommended treatment or plan of care to the extent 
permitted by law and hospital policy and to be informed of the medical consequences 
of this action. In case of such refusal, the patient is entitled to other appropriate care and 
services that the hospital provides or transfer to another hospital. The hospital should 
notify patients of any policy that might aﬀect patient choice within the institution.
7. The patient has the right to every consideration of privacy. Case discussion, 
consultation, examination, and treatment should be conducted to protect each patient’s 
privacy.
8. The patient has the right to expect that all communications and records pertaining to 
his/her care will be treated as conﬁdential by the hospital as required by law. The patient 
has the right to expect that the hospital will emphasize the conﬁdentiality of this 
information when it releases it to any other parties entitled to review information in these 
records.
Telehealth Application Guidelines
20
9. The patient has the right to review the records pertaining to his/her medical care and to 
have the information explained or interpreted as necessary, except when restricted by law.
10. The patient has the right to expect that, within its capacity and policies, a hospital will 
make a reasonable response to the request of a patient for appropriate and medically 
indicated care and services. The hospital must provide evaluation, service, and/or referral 
as indicated by the urgency of the case. When medically appropriate and legally 
permissible, or when a patient has so requested, a patient may be transferred to another 
facility. The institution to which the patient is to be transferred must ﬁrst have accepted the 
patient for transfer. The patient must also have the beneﬁt of complete information and 
explanation concerning the need for, risks, beneﬁts, and alternatives to such a transfer.
11. The patient has the right to ask and be informed of the existence of business 
relationships among the hospital, educational institutions, other health care providers, or 
payers that may inﬂuence the patient’s treatment and care.
12. The patient has the right to consent to or decline to participate in proposed research 
studies or human experimentation aﬀecting care and treatment or requiring direct patient 
involvement and to have those studies fully explained prior to consent. A patient who 
declines to participate in research or experimentation is entitled to the most eﬀective care 
that the hospital can otherwise provide.
13. The patient has the right to expect reasonable continuity of care when appropriate and 
to be informed by physicians and other caregivers of available and realistic patient care 
options when hospital care is no longer appropriate.
14. The patient has the right to be informed of hospital policies and practices that relate to 
patient care, treatment, and responsibilities. The patient has the right to be informed of 
available resources for resolving disputes, grievances, and conﬂicts, such as ethics 
committees, patient representatives, or other mechanisms available in the institution. The 
patient has the right to be informed of the hospital’s charges for services and available 
payment methods (19–23).
Telehealth Application Guidelines
21
Patient Rights in Telehealth Settings:
1. An informed patient consent shall be recorded, preferably online, before any 
telehealth activity.
2. The consent template in appendix (B) is deﬁned by the NHIC. 
3. Patients may refuse and/or cancel any participation in a telehealth activity, at any 
time, without the need to justify. 
4. Patients may request a telehealth activity. 
5. Patients should receive relevant education on telehealth if needed. 
6. A protocol shall be deﬁned by the healthcare facility in case of technical incidents 
stopping an activity. 
7. A protocol shall be deﬁned by the healthcare facility in case of a medical emergency 
occurring during an activity.
8. Patients should receive continuity of care (24).
Telehealth Application Guidelines
22
Clinical service continuity of Care: 
Facilities must have business continuity plan that is activated in case of clinical or 
technical disruption to ensure the continuity of care to all patients and guarantee an 
alternative plan (B) to be ready.
Insurance coverage:
1. The malpractice insurance of HCPs shall include telehealth practice.
2. Health insurance coverage of telehealth activities shall be applied in accordance with 
the regulations on health insurance coverage of CHI in KSA.
Technical aspects of telehealth:
Basic requirement of telehealth:
The information and communications technology used for telehealth should be ﬁt for the 
clinical purpose of the consultation (26–29). Speciﬁcally: 
• The equipment is reliable and works well over the locally available network and 
bandwidth. 
• The equipment is compatible with equipment used by the patient-end health worker. 
• The equipment and network secured, and privacy and conﬁdentiality during the 
consultation can be ensured.
• The equipment is of a high enough quality to facilitate good communication between 
all participants and accurate transfer of clinical information. 
• Exchange of data shall be governed by the same overarching guidelines on privacy, 
security and accurate representation of truth e.g. high-quality imagery of diagnostic 
studies, body parts, etc. 
Telehealth Application Guidelines
23

Telehealth Data Management:
Health Data Management in general is the process of developing and executing plans, 
policies, initiatives, and practices to enable entities to manage and govern their data. 
This is mainly to achieve the aspired value, with data considered an organizational asset. 
Furthermore, managing data would enable an organization to track and inventory data 
like a physical asset (30–45).
While, Telehealth Data Management in particular means having a data-operating system 
in place that serves as the foundation for getting data controlled under a discrete 
authority (regardless of the database structure, whether centralized, decentralized, or 
hybrid). This is to ensure the conﬁdentiality, integrity and availability of such data used for 
telehealth purposes and that, ﬁrst, this data is available a timely manner for authorized 
HCP and used in across any organization (e.g. hospital or clinic) participating or willing 
to participate in telehealth services. Second, unauthorized HCP and users are not 
granted access to such data. Finally, only authorized users can update this data to make 
sure it is complete and accurate. 
Health data includes, but is not limited to the following:
•   Patient demographics
•   Hospitalization    
• Medical notes
•   Laboratory test results
•   Procedures and surgeries
•  Imaging, like x-rays, computerized tomography (CT), and magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI)
•  Laboratory tests 
•  Treatments and Prescriptions
•   Diagnosis
•   Referrals and other communication
•  Physiologic monitoring data
•   Provider information
•   Patient insurance
• Administrative information
Telehealth Application Guidelines
25
Requirements of Telehealth Data Management:
1. Activate data governance (operating model) that insures data sharing across 
organizations are done securely and safely. This should comply with national data 
protection laws and regulations in case of a national scope. Otherwise, all relevant 
laws and regulations in case of multi-jurisdictional telehealth scope. 
2. Provide data analysis means that enhance telehealth care.
3. Provide immediate access to data at the bedside or in Emergency department. 
4. Decentralized and hybrid systems of healthcare data management improve treatment 
between medical centers with fully synchronized medical records.
5. Cloud computing systems and other emerging technologies allow clinics and 
hospitals to oﬄoad the majority of their data into a centralized hub that can be more 
secure and less expensive. This should be in compliance with NCA and NDMO 
policies regarding data storage and cloud computing
6. Automated cloud data allows for automatic policy-based cleanings, which allows for 
the deletion of irrelevant data to keep more space free.
7. Improved data management helps in reduction of patient costs and leads to a better 
business and private decisions making.
8. Creation of a more streamlined information’s exchange and enhancing patient service 
and security
9. Ensuring the quality and interoperability of information. 
Data Management Best Practices for Hospitals and Medical Facilities:
Implementing accurate data management systems is imperative to ensure the eﬃcient 
storage and transfer of patients' information. Data management best practices also 
improve the conﬁdentiality, reliability and comprehensiveness of this information.
To reap the beneﬁts of exceptional data governance, hospitals and medical facilities 
must work together to better manage, organize, protect and transfer information 
between patients and providers. 
The following are few key ways via which healthcare facilities (hospitals or clinics) can 
best practice medical data management.
Telehealth Application Guidelines
26
Technology Use:
• Electronic health records (EHRs) are preferred to be accessible in order to reduce 
treatment errors that result from gaps in knowledge regarding past medical history, 
allergies, or medications, especially when multiple providers are treating patients.
• Hospitals and clinics adopting telehealth services are advised to implement EHRs, 
since they are often the most accessible. The widespread adoption fosters the 
creation of more uniﬁed data management systems.
• If EHR cannot be implemented then using scanned standardized manual records, 
reports and data can facilitate the use of Telehealth via proper communication 
channels including video and audio conferencing. 
Data Standardization:
• Ensure consistent data shared between systems.
• Standardize capturing, deﬁning and transmitting data for interoperability.
• Promoting consistent or comprehensive data requires unifying the hospital systems 
as possible with the ability to access the EHR or manual record for any patient at any 
place in the Kingdom by an authorized healthcare professional using his/her national 
identiﬁcation number (ID).
• Medical institutions can focus on achieving standardized data within their facilities by 
implementing a single shared data management system and server.
Seamless Information Exchange Enabling:
• Streamlining information transfer should follow standardization of data input. Both 
app-centric format and more of patient-centric view should be streamlined in order to 
ensure up-to-date deployment and security of the application whether desktop or 
mobile, in-house or cloud. This will facilitate the seamless exchange of clinical 
information to stakeholders, health providers and patients.
• Implementing systems like vendor-neutral archives provide interoperability among 
departments and allow harmonious data and imaging exchange.
• A Vendor Neutral Archive (VNA) stores images generated by medical devices and 
scanners using a standard format. It enables interoperability between the systems 
that store the images in the Picture Archiving and Communication Systems (PACS). 
Medical staﬀ can view images from across the organization and remotely using 
multiple screens or devices.
Telehealth Application Guidelines
27
A Comprehensive View Formation:
• After creating more standardized data and facilitating its exchange, medical 
institutions should improve the information’s reliability, thus forming a comprehensive 
360-degree view of both providers and patients. This complete picture helps 
organizations understand where healthcare professionals practice and what patients 
they see.
• It is essential to link information from various proﬁles including name, address and 
National/Iqama ID, Mobile number and Hospital Medical Record Number (MRN) to 
the same provider. This practice ensures no one overlooks pieces of information and 
data is consistent between proﬁles.
• Patients’ contact information need continuous updating and consolidation. For 
example, if a physician overlooks a vital piece of information, like an allergy, this could 
result in medical malpractice and adverse reactions in the patient. Thus, it is best to 
prompt patients to provide updated data whenever possible. 
Sensitive Data Protection:
• Data breaches compromise sensitive data and can be very costly for providers.
• Appropriate data management practices include setting policies to ensure this 
protection, such as a mobile device policy, which governs what data users can store 
on apps and mobile gadgets. 
• Organizations should also secure wireless networks, encrypt portable devices and 
educate staﬀ members about diﬀerent violations.
• Data Backup is critical to ensure organizations can recover from various types of data 
losses. 
• Data Protection using data loss prevention (DLP), storage with built-in data 
protection, ﬁrewalls, encryption, and endpoint protection. 
• With the Health Catalyst Data Operating System (DOS™) Solution, data is pulled in 
from a wide variety of source systems, providing a single control point where 
individual access rights can be granted. From there, the organization can establish 
data governance and track data lineage as data is enriched and spread to the edges 
of the organization.
• Individual organizations such as hospitals or health systems usually provide access to 
their data to their internal staﬀ.  Larger collaborations for example in the execution of 
Telehealth programs can provide mediated or collaborative access to clinical data 
repositories for eligible authorized participating individuals. 
Telehealth Application Guidelines
28
Data Storage Considerations: 
• Medical data is sensitive and must adhere to national data protection laws and 
regulations in case of a national scope. Otherwise, all relevant laws and regulations in 
case of multi-jurisdictional telehealth scope.
• Data storage should be hosted within Saudi Arabia’s geographical boundaries.
• Data storage should be able to meet and have the future capability for scalability in 
both data storage and connectivity.
• Backup of high availability in disaster recovery
• Recommendation should be at least tier 3 tier 4  for remote patient management of 
critical cases.
• In cases of connectivity sudden interruption, the point of care devices should be able 
to store the data locally and be able to forward the data once the connection is 
restored. 
• Best practice is when a telehealth network covers a wide geographical area uses 
cloud service through a cloud service provider approved by CST and compliant with 
the data security and privacy act of health care information.
• Accessibility for integration with national health platform services.
• Data security and privacy on a cloud is a joint responsibility of both cloud service 
provider and the healthcare facility.
• Data custody and ownership should follow the policy and procedures of the national 
guidelines and acts in case of a national scope. Otherwise, a consensus needs to be 
reached all relevant laws and regulations in case of multi-jurisdictional telehealth 
scope. 
Telehealth Application Guidelines
29

o Service & application
o Tele-consultation
o Tele-diagnosis
o Remote patient monitoring
o Tele-management
o Tele-surgery
o Tele-assistance
o Tele-expertise
o Tele-education
o Cross-border access
o Emerging technolog y
Scope of Virtual practice
Telehealth Application Guidelines
31
Service and application:
Getting patient set up with telehealth technology:
Telehealth services in emergency can be provided based on the following criteria:
Medical indication for telehealth:
1. Telehealth in emergency cases can deliver consultation to the patient in an emergency 
whenever a specialty consult is needed in a timely manner.
2. Whenever a requirement to have an access to a certiﬁed and an experienced staﬀ to 
assess in deciding a reliable and eﬀective further treatment plan. 
3. In the case of a patient who may require a transfer to another advanced facility for 
further care plan.
Requirements to conduct telemedicine services:
1. A suitable technology platform that provide a real-time video call, vital signs evidence, 
performing a remote applicable diagnostic exams such as ECG, REAL TIME US.
2. In emergency cases, the biomedical device should meet the international standards 
of FDA of biomedical devices classiﬁcation as class II.
3. Capability of continuity of care can provided through tele-monitoring.  
4. The emergency telemedicine services should be initiated/ conducted through a 
technology platform that is locally hosted in Saudi Arabia.
5. The telemedicine platform should provide the HCP the clinical documentation 
capability. 
6. Provide the capability of remote physiological monitoring and recording. 
7. This information should be archived, retrieved and audited when needed according to 
the national regulation and information archiving law.
Telehealth Application Guidelines
32
Patient Management 
• If the condition can be appropriately managed via telemedicine, then the HCP may 
take a professional judgment to either:
◦ Provide teleconsultation and guidance related to speciﬁc clinical condition
◦ Request additional information such as lab diagnostics and others.
◦ Provide speciﬁc treatment by prescribing medication via approved prescribing 
channels.
◦ Exchange patient information via telehealth means safely and securely according to 
the national health exchange platform.
◦ Patients shall not be subject to ‘ﬁrst experience’ interventions. An exception can be 
made with complete informed consent of the patient or their representative in extreme 
circumstances where it is the only way to save a life or prevent permanent damage.
 
Services allowed to be provided through telehealth:
1. Triage of patients.
2. Diagnosis.
3. Video sighting of clinical signs.
4. Tele-mental health services.
5. Tele-monitoring.
6. Tele-prescription.
7. Tele-pathology & Tele-radiology:
◦  Pathology requests can be sent to any healthcare professional.
◦        Ordering and interpretation of patient lab results.
8. Tele-Referral where applicable and relevant for the case.
9.  Follow up care and case management.
10. Issuance of sick leave.
11.  Patient and family education and counselling.
12. Any other tele-consultation medical services approved by the healthcare facility. 
Examples may include provision of rehabilitation, speech and physical therapy.
Telehealth Application Guidelines
33
Tele-consultation:
Deﬁnition:
Teleconsultation (TLC) is a remote medical consultation between a patient and a HCP 
(46).
Description:
Teleconsultation: the patient can call the HCP or vice versa, based on a booking such as 
in a virtual clinic or Tele-clinic. In addition, the patient can call the HCP instantly for any 
support needed such as in tele-triaging or via call centers that support chronic disease 
patients at home by HCP . 
Teleconsultation includes the following encounters:
• Tele-triaging: Initial teleconsultation by patients using various channels for a new 
instant medical need, who has no previous registration or unknown medical history. 
During the teleconsultation, the patient requires an evaluation with instructions for 
measures that can be taken initially, and/or directions based on the urgency level to 
the suitable healthcare service such as calling an ambulance, immediate visit to the 
emergency department, primary HCP or visiting a specialized HCP .
• Tele-clinic: tele-consultation mainly for the ﬁrst visit of the patient to a remote 
specialized HCP (if it’s not done in-person), where the patient have to visit a near-by 
clinic equipped for the tele-consultation devices including all the accessories needed 
for the patient evaluation and with a presence of assistance to apply/use these 
instruments, to achieve a proper specialized evaluation. 
• Virtual-clinic: a remote consultation between a patient and a HCP anywhere using 
video conference technology, which may utilize an integrated accessories and 
instruments for clinical evaluations. This consultation can be planned with a booking 
such as a patient with chronic disease follow-up or home healthcare follow-up or 
instantly based on the patient’s needs such as patient having a new complain, 
whether the patient is seeking support on the same primary condition or consulting 
for a newly emerged clinical problem.
Telehealth Application Guidelines
34
Examples:
• Tele-triaging: artiﬁcial intelligence can be one of the useful channels that can provide 
or augment this service. After the required SFDA approval. 
• Tele-clinic: patient consulting a remote cardiologist from a nearby clinic with the 
presence of a physician/nurse (based on the need). 
• Virtual clinic: 
Minimum requirements:
• Medico-legal:
◦ The HCP should conﬁrm that the settings of the session are appropriate to conduct 
the consultation.
◦ The HCP should conﬁrm that the patient has a proper daylight exposure for a proper 
clinical evaluation.
◦ In case of mentally retarded patients, a family caregiver should be attending the 
session.
◦ The HCP should know the limitations of the remote clinical evaluation using the 
attached accessories and should decide whether the patient needs a physical visit or 
not.
◦ The HCP should give the patient medication needed and/or directions to the proper 
service he needs.
◦ The HCP should give the patient instructions according to the possibility of the 
progression of the patient’s case. 
The HCP should give the patient instructions about the medication usage and assure 
that the patient and/or the caregiver understands and perform it properly. For example, 
the use of insulin injections and Salbutamol inhaler.
Virtual clinic
 examples
Booked
 consultation
Instant 
consultation
Follow-up
Chronic disease for a regular 
follow-up
instant consultation to a 
related pre-existing condition 
(chronic disease)
Additional booking for a new 
clinical condition related or 
unrelated to the pre-existing 
condition
instant consultation to an 
unrelated complain to the 
pre-existing condition
New condition
Telehealth Application Guidelines
35
Technology Use:
• Electronic health records (EHRs) are preferred to be accessible in order to reduce 
treatment errors that result from gaps in knowledge regarding past medical history, 
allergies, or medications, especially when multiple providers are treating patients.
• Hospitals and clinics adopting telehealth services are advised to implement EHRs, 
since they are often the most accessible. The widespread adoption fosters the 
creation of more uniﬁed data management systems.
• If EHR cannot be implemented then using scanned standardized manual records, 
reports and data can facilitate the use of Telehealth via proper communication 
channels including video and audio conferencing. 
Data Standardization:
• Ensure consistent data shared between systems.
• Standardize capturing, deﬁning and transmitting data for interoperability.
• Promoting consistent or comprehensive data requires unifying the hospital systems 
as possible with the ability to access the EHR or manual record for any patient at any 
place in the Kingdom by an authorized healthcare professional using his/her national 
identiﬁcation number (ID).
• Medical institutions can focus on achieving standardized data within their facilities by 
implementing a single shared data management system and server.
Seamless Information Exchange Enabling:
• Streamlining information transfer should follow standardization of data input. Both 
app-centric format and more of patient-centric view should be streamlined in order to 
ensure up-to-date deployment and security of the application whether desktop or 
mobile, in-house or cloud. This will facilitate the seamless exchange of clinical 
information to stakeholders, health providers and patients.
• Implementing systems like vendor-neutral archives provide interoperability among 
departments and allow harmonious data and imaging exchange.
• A Vendor Neutral Archive (VNA) stores images generated by medical devices and 
scanners using a standard format. It enables interoperability between the systems 
that store the images in the Picture Archiving and Communication Systems (PACS). 
Medical staﬀ can view images from across the organization and remotely using 
multiple screens or devices.
• Setup:
◦ The systems and devices used should comply with the Saudi personal protection 
law and any national privacy requirements by the National Data Management Oﬃce 
(NDMO) and the cyber security authority.
◦ Access to the session between the patient and the HCP should require two-factor 
authentication.
◦ In all tele-consultations except tele-triaging, the HCP is preferred to be able to have 
an access to the patient’s historical data and previous documentations.
◦ HCP is preferred to be able to have access to the patient’s medical records, in cases 
of frequent follow-ups, in order to review the previous medical history and 
documentations and continuously update on the same medical record. 
◦ The instructions for the bandwidth required should be given to both parties using 
teleconsultation.
◦ The session should be encrypted.
◦ Recording the tele-consultation sessions is not required, except in certain 
medico-legal needs. Such as, some of the mental health cases, criminal related 
evaluations.
Telehealth Application Guidelines
36
• Technical:
◦ Tele-clinic: For each specialized tele-clinic, connected devices and accessories 
should be available at the bedside.
◦ Virtual clinic: the patient may utilize an integrated accessories and instruments for 
clinical evaluation.
◦ Tele-triage: if artiﬁcial intelligence is utilized to give direct instructions/directions, 
then an SFDA approval is required for the use of that Artiﬁcial intelligence.
◦ Alternative channels such as telephone calls can be provided for some of the urgent 
clinical needs, such as tele-triaging hotline, home healthcare cases, and rehab.
• Personnel:
◦ Tele-clinic: The bedside HCP should be trained to use the connected devices and 
accessories to support the remote HCP in doing a proper evaluation in addition to 
do some required bedside evaluations techniques.
• Patient experience and patient rights:
◦ Virtual clinic: The patient or the caregiver should be trained to use any accessories 
or IoT devices used at the bedside for a better evaluation and monitoring purposes.
◦ Tele-triaging:
▪ The patient should understand the tele-triaging is a screening service that will not 
achieve a ﬁnal diagnosis. 
▪ The patient should understand the tele-triaging would help mainly in evaluating the 
urgent clinical condition in order to get instructions about initial interventions and 
directions to the proper needed service.
Telehealth Application Guidelines
37
Tele-Diagnosis:
Deﬁnition: 
The use of telecommunications technology to facilitate the remote interpretation and/or 
diagnosis of the remotely performed Studies by a HCP without synchronous interaction 
with the patient or the requesting professional (47).
Description: 
The use of telecommunications technology to enable HCP such as radiologist, 
cardiologist, histopathology consultant to perform interpretation and/or diagnosis of 
the remotely performed Studies such as diagnostic imaging, electrocardiogram, and 
image-rich pathological, without synchronous interaction with the patient or the 
requesting professional.
The process require transferring and visualizing the images in a clinical standard 
accepted format and resolution.    
The HCP in the interpretation may require further evaluation or studies for example 
requesting performing special clinical evaluation, cardiovascular system examination 
or performing further study such as CXR, or blood gas, to support ECG interpretation 
in the diﬀerential diagnosis. 
The Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) will be playing a major role in augmenting HCP initially, and 
supporting the screening programs by reduce the cost, using a highly sensitive AI that 
transfer only the abnormal studies to the HCP , so we can perform more studies with a 
lesser number of HCP . Furthermore, AI will perform eventually full Tele-Diagnosis 
services, but to assure the reliability and safety it requires detailed studies that support 
the process registration for each service, and use case.
Telehealth Application Guidelines
38
Examples: 
• Tele-Radiology: the practice of a radiologist interpreting medical images while not 
physically present in the location where the images are generated (48 ).
• Tele-ECG: the Practice of a cardiologist interpreting and evaluating 
electrocardiogram, remotely taken by handheld tele-electrocardiogram while not 
physically present in the location where it is taken.
• Tele-Pathology: The use of telecommunications technology to facilitate the transfer of 
image-rich pathology data between remote locations for the purposes of diagnosis, 
education, and research.
Minimum requirements of: 
• Medico-Legal: 
◦ The images should be captured using the medico-legally accepted format and 
resolution 
◦ The images resolution should maintained unchanged during transfer or storage. 
◦ The professional should evaluate and study the images using a medico-legally 
accepted display device with the required resolution for each study category
◦ The studies should be labeled with patient and facility demography.
◦ The requests should be labeled based on urgency level by the requesting practitioner, 
to fulfill the required service level agreement (SLA).
◦ The professional should receive the required report about the case to perform proper 
evaluation.
◦ The professional should receive training on the devices used in the evaluation process 
such as diagnostic modality, and the display tools.
◦ The Medico-legal disputes resulting from the remote interpretation and / or Diagnosis 
of the HCP is similar that of the regular HCP practice within the healthcare facilities.
Telehealth Application Guidelines
39
• Setup:
◦ The system used should comply with the Saudi personal protection law and any 
national privacy requirements by the NDMO and the cyber security authority.
◦ The system used should assure the required availability, to fulﬁll the respond time for 
the most urgent expected cases based on the urgency level.
◦ The devices/ display used by the reading professional should be calibrated based 
on the recommended by the manufacturing company. 
◦ The system should capture and store all the multimedia ﬁles, requesting forms, all 
transactions timestamps, urgency level and the reporting document during the 
process for medico-legal purposes.
◦ Any AI to be used in the service should be registered in SFDA.
• Personnel:
◦ The professional should receive training on the devices used in the evaluation 
process such as diagnostic modality, and the display tools.
◦ All legal requirements applied to a HCP in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia shall be 
applied to the practice of tele-Diagnosis.
◦ All patients are eligible to beneﬁts from Tele-Diagnosis by a remote HCP if: 
▪ The required multimedia materials captured, delivered, and visualized with the 
medically accepted quality to perform the evaluation required.  
▪ Requested HCP registered, certiﬁed, and trained, to provide the requested 
evaluation. 
▪ The service and tools must be certiﬁed by SFDA for medical practice. (for example 
AI in Mammogram screening)
◦ The following is not eligible for Tele-Diagnosis request:
▪ If the diagnosis requires a clinical evaluation that needs a local presence of HCP , or 
life evaluation tools that is not under the classiﬁcation of Tele-Diagnosis service.
Telehealth Application Guidelines
40
Service and application:
Getting patient set up with telehealth technology:
Telehealth services in emergency can be provided based on the following criteria:
Medical indication for telehealth:
1. Telehealth in emergency cases can deliver consultation to the patient in an emergency 
whenever a specialty consult is needed in a timely manner.
2. Whenever a requirement to have an access to a certiﬁed and an experienced staﬀ to 
assess in deciding a reliable and eﬀective further treatment plan. 
3. In the case of a patient who may require a transfer to another advanced facility for 
further care plan.
Requirements to conduct telemedicine services:
1. A suitable technology platform that provide a real-time video call, vital signs evidence, 
performing a remote applicable diagnostic exams such as ECG, REAL TIME US.
2. In emergency cases, the biomedical device should meet the international standards 
of FDA of biomedical devices classiﬁcation as class II.
3. Capability of continuity of care can provided through tele-monitoring.  
4. The emergency telemedicine services should be initiated/ conducted through a 
technology platform that is locally hosted in Saudi Arabia.
5. The telemedicine platform should provide the HCP the clinical documentation 
capability. 
6. Provide the capability of remote physiological monitoring and recording. 
7. This information should be archived, retrieved and audited when needed according to 
the national regulation and information archiving law.
• Patient experience and patient rights:
◦ The images should be stored and transferred using technology that provide the 
required privacy and conﬁdentiality.
◦ Patient consent should be taken, as Patients may need for a tele-Diagnosis at any 
time. 
◦ HCPs practicing tele-diagnosis should respect their obligations and ethical 
responsibilities
◦ The secondary used of the patient unidentiﬁed data should follow the governmental 
governance and regulation (IRB approval) in that regard. 
◦ The secondary use of identity bounded patients data for research requires the 
patient approvals.
• Technical: 
◦ The devices used for study evaluation should provide the minimum medico-legally 
accepted resolution for each of study.
◦ The devices used for evaluation should be calibrated in frequent manner, based on 
the manufacturing recommendation, to maintain the accuracy and performance
Telehealth Application Guidelines
41
Remote patient monitoring:
Deﬁnition: 
Remote patient monitoring (RPM) is a technology that enables monitoring of patients 
outside a conventional clinical setting, such as home or a remote area to trigger clinical 
interventions as needed. The technology increases access to care at the right time and 
decreases healthcare delivery costs (49,50).
Description: 
RPM is the use of digital technologies to monitor and capture medical and other health 
information from patients. Also, electronically transmit this information to HCP for 
assessment, recommendations and instructions, if needed.
RPM allows HCP to continue tracking healthcare data from patients if they are 
discharged or at home. It also encourages patients to observe their health status.
Examples: 
• Blood pressure monitor: With remote blood pressure monitors, HCP can perform 
ongoing virtual monitoring and enables the treatment of hypertension/high blood 
pressure
• Blood glucose monitor: Practitioners can use the data captured by a remote blood 
glucose-monitoring device to detect potential alarming changes in glucose levels 
and take immediate action.
• Spirometry testing: plays an essential role in diagnosing lung diseases as well as 
assessing and monitoring conditions virtually such as asthma and chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Minimum requirements of: 
• Medico-Legal: 
◦ Intermittent readings of RPM tools for patients that need continuous monitoring 
cannot be accepted, and the frequency of monitoring intervals should be conﬁgured 
as per each patient clinical requirements. 
◦ Integration minimum requirements as the NHIC interoperability standards.
◦ Safety and security measures should be applied on the service at all stages 
(collection, transfer, and store).
◦ A clear plan for the remotely monitored patient should be designed by his primary 
physician for the accepted normal parameters range and advices for the 
interventions for the common expected problems and when the patient requires a 
hospital admission.
Telehealth Application Guidelines
42
Tele-consultation:
Deﬁnition:
Teleconsultation (TLC) is a remote medical consultation between a patient and a HCP 
(46).
Description:
Teleconsultation: the patient can call the HCP or vice versa, based on a booking such as 
in a virtual clinic or Tele-clinic. In addition, the patient can call the HCP instantly for any 
support needed such as in tele-triaging or via call centers that support chronic disease 
patients at home by HCP . 
Teleconsultation includes the following encounters:
• Tele-triaging: Initial teleconsultation by patients using various channels for a new 
instant medical need, who has no previous registration or unknown medical history. 
During the teleconsultation, the patient requires an evaluation with instructions for 
measures that can be taken initially, and/or directions based on the urgency level to 
the suitable healthcare service such as calling an ambulance, immediate visit to the 
emergency department, primary HCP or visiting a specialized HCP .
• Tele-clinic: tele-consultation mainly for the ﬁrst visit of the patient to a remote 
specialized HCP (if it’s not done in-person), where the patient have to visit a near-by 
clinic equipped for the tele-consultation devices including all the accessories needed 
for the patient evaluation and with a presence of assistance to apply/use these 
instruments, to achieve a proper specialized evaluation. 
• Virtual-clinic: a remote consultation between a patient and a HCP anywhere using 
video conference technology, which may utilize an integrated accessories and 
instruments for clinical evaluations. This consultation can be planned with a booking 
such as a patient with chronic disease follow-up or home healthcare follow-up or 
instantly based on the patient’s needs such as patient having a new complain, 
whether the patient is seeking support on the same primary condition or consulting 
for a newly emerged clinical problem.
• Setup:
Most RPM technologies follow a general architecture that consists of the components 
below:   
◦ Sensors on a device that is enabled by wireless communications to measure 
physiological parameters. Any device that is responsible of detecting one of the 
targeted parameters to measure must be certiﬁed and graded by SFDA.
◦ Sensors must be connected to a central database by Wi-Fi or cellular 
communication protocols depending on the manufacturer.
◦ Local data storage at patients’ site that interfaces between sensors and other 
centralized data repository and/or healthcare facilities.
◦ Centralized repository to store data sent from sensors, local data storage, 
diagnostic applications, and/or healthcare facilities.
◦ Diagnostic application software that develops treatment recommendations and 
intervention alerts based on the analysis of collected data
•   Personnel:
◦ The professional should receive a proper training that insures eﬀective 
tele-monitoring delivery 
◦ The healthcare facility should be licensed to perform Remote patient monitoring 
service.
◦ Patients should be educated on the device pre-hospital discharge. 
•   Patient experience and patient rights:
◦ HCPs practicing Remote patient monitoring should respect their obligations and 
ethical responsibilities.
◦ Patient should be consented prior to using the RPM tool. 
◦ The patient must educated about the expected outcome, instruction of use, 
indication, automated reporting method, basic troubleshooting skills.
◦ Scheduled calls and checkups to make sure the patient follows the instructions of 
use.
Telehealth Application Guidelines
43
Tele-management:
Deﬁnition:
Tele-management is the remote management of inpatients by remote HCPs.
Description:
Utilizing telemedicine technology in order to provide a complete management of inpatients 
remotely. Tele-management provides a better care management in case of scarce or no 
medical resources adapted to patient needs on patient site. Where a credentialed and 
privileged HCP is in charge of managing patients admitted in a remote hospital with an 
accessibility to the patient medical record and streaming of clinical information required to 
perform this responsibility (for example, vital signs, ECG, ventilators parameters, two-way 
video communication and accessing the monitors of evaluations tools.) based on the case 
and the performed rules.
Examples:
• Tele-ICU: a remote expert team manages an intensive care unit without intensivist 
physicians on site through Tele-ICU technologies.
• Tele-Stroke: a neurologist manages a stroke patient remotely from another center, 
starting from evaluation, diagnosis, and treatment.
• Tele-Round: a HCP managing patients remotely using robotics technology for routine 
rounds, utilizing connected clinical evaluation devices such as camera, Stethoscope, 
Otoscope, Ophthalmoscope, endoscope, thermometer, pulse-oximeter and 
sphygmomanometer.
Minimum requirements of:
• Medico-legal:
◦ Similar to regular clinical practice, managing HCP should continuously write his 
documentation in the patient medical record including all the clinical evaluations, notes, 
diagnosis, healthcare professionals communication, hand-oﬀs, physician orders and 
treatment.
◦ Communication between HCPs should be documented using electronic means.
◦ Any addendum or amendment occur on the physician orders should be communicated 
to the HCP at the patient site, documented, time stamped and e-signed.
◦ There should be the ability to access and review current data from both the 
tele-managing physician and bedside HCP to facilitate communication and decision 
making process.
◦ HCP at the patient site should have a full capability to perform the expected emergency 
procedures that may occur for the admitted patient according to the patient needs 
and/or orders/instructions of the remote managing HCP .
◦ Alternative communication method should be available between the two HCPs in the 
remote and the patient’s sites (such as landline or mobile phone) to be used in case of 
disconnect of the tele-management communication system.
Minimum requirements:
• Medico-legal:
◦ The HCP should conﬁrm that the settings of the session are appropriate to conduct 
the consultation.
◦ The HCP should conﬁrm that the patient has a proper daylight exposure for a proper 
clinical evaluation.
◦ In case of mentally retarded patients, a family caregiver should be attending the 
session.
◦ The HCP should know the limitations of the remote clinical evaluation using the 
attached accessories and should decide whether the patient needs a physical visit or 
not.
◦ The HCP should give the patient medication needed and/or directions to the proper 
service he needs.
◦ The HCP should give the patient instructions according to the possibility of the 
progression of the patient’s case. 
The HCP should give the patient instructions about the medication usage and assure 
that the patient and/or the caregiver understands and perform it properly. For example, 
the use of insulin injections and Salbutamol inhaler.
Telehealth Application Guidelines
44
• Setup:
◦ A uniﬁed electronic medical record (EMR) is preferred to be used for both the remote 
healthcare site and the patient site. Otherwise, the integration between the multiple 
systems should have instant synchronization to avoid latency between orders and 
administrations of medication or performance of the orders.
◦ Technology should be able to optimize audio and visual clarity for enhancement of 
clinical assessment. options include:
▪ Real time
▪ Two-way/one-way high-deﬁnition audio-visual solutions
▪ Zooming capability and day lighting to support visual evaluation
▪ Audio support via traditional phone access as a backup alternative line.
◦ Adequate telecommunications bandwidth and security to connect near and far end 
equipment.
◦ Adequate telecommunications availability should be provided based on the 
criticality of the services provided.
• Personnel:
◦ HCPs providing tele-management services shall have the necessary clinical 
preparation, orientation and ongoing education to ensure they possess the 
necessary competencies to promote quality care and patient safety.
• Patient experience and patient rights:
◦ All remotely managed inpatients and families shall receive information, which 
includes the role and beneﬁt in using the tele-management services in improving 
patient care and assure the conﬁdentiality, availability and safety of this technology.
Telehealth Application Guidelines
45
• Technical:
◦ Devices shall have up-to-date ﬁrmware and security requirement.
◦ Healthcare professional’s personal computer or mobile device has the latest 
security patches and updates applied to the operating system and third party 
applications.
◦ Mobile devices should be conﬁgured to utilize an inactivity timeout function that 
requires a passphrase or re-authentication to access the device after the timeout 
threshold has been exceeded. Timeout should not exceed 15 minutes.
◦ Unauthorized persons shall not be allowed access to sensitive information stored on 
the device, or use the device to access sensitive applications or network resources.
◦ Healthcare and institutional IT professionals should have the capability to remotely 
disable or remove data from any mobile device containing PHI or sensitive 
institutional data, should the device be lost or stolen.
◦ Remote management of the system should permit far end camera control (FECC), 
maintenance or diagnostic capabilities such as auto restart, remote conﬁguration, 
proactive monitoring and/or alerts(51,52).
◦ System should allow point-to-point connectivity from within or outside of the 
healthcare facility.
◦ Audio and video transmission secure by using point-to-point encryption that meets 
recognized and accepted standards based on local standards.
◦ Proper testing and maintenance for all functionalities for each system upgrade, 
newly installed ﬁrmware, new infrastructure or endpoint.
◦ Implement planned and unplanned downtime procedures that ensure continued 
service and may include the use of appropriate backup technologies.
◦ Documentation, storage, and retrieval of health records consistent with the 
organizational, industry and governmental standards.
◦ Seamless ﬂow of information between patient information systems to enhance 
clinical support and promote continuity of care. 
Telehealth Application Guidelines
46
Tele-Surgery: 
Deﬁnition: 
Any remote surgical procedure performed by a surgeon or a surgical team, at any 
distance from the patient and theatre. 
Note: When remote HCPs provide synchronous support during a surgery or 
intervention to another HCPs performing at the patient site, this is not tele-surgery but 
tele-assistance.
Description:
• Tele surgery uses wireless networking and robotic technology to allow surgeons 
(HCP) to operate on patients who are distantly located, by combining advances in 
imaging, video, robotics and sensors, the system gives surgeon the full sensory 
experience of hands-on surgery. The surgeon performs the operation sitting at a 
console that displays a high-resolution image of the patient. Allows collaboration 
and assistance between senior-to-senior and senior to junior surgeons in providing 
a variety of advanced surgical care to patient at rural or any distant site. 
• AI might have a role in augmentation of surgeon for performing automated surgeries.
Examples:
• Tele-proctoring and tele-accreditation: extensions of tele-mentoring, involve 
educational or professional assessment techniques for documentation and granting 
privileges. 
• •Tele-robotics: It is an application of robotic surgery where the surgeon performs the 
surgery with the help of a surgical robotic system, locally or remotely that permit 
surgeon to operate on patient using robotic system and instrument like robotic arm 
e.g., Laparoscopic surgery. The relationship between the tele robot and the surgeon 
called Master-Slave relationship.
• Tele-presence: Is a novel technology allowing the surgeon to perform a surgery 
without seeing or touching the patient directly, it is a computerized interface at the 
surgical workstation in the remote operative site (53). Technology of telepresence 
creates an illusion for the surgeon, giving him or her a feel of a complete immersion 
into another environment, which could be real or synthetic. Through the virtual 
reality, the surgeon will feel like he is in a real environment using the tele robot to 
telecast their hand motion by conveying sensory feedbacks like sight, haptic, and 
acoustic to the remote operating room. e.g., vascular surgery, organ excision in 
trauma surgery (54–59). 
Telehealth Application Guidelines
47
Applications:
• Provides high-quality surgery to medically underserved locations such as rural 
areas, battleﬁelds, spacecraft, and peripheral hospitals.
• Allows for surgical collaboration amongst surgeons at diﬀerent medical centers in 
real-time.
• Training and mentoring new surgeons.
 
Minimum requirements of: 
• Medico-Legal:
◦ Licensure requirements and regulatory regimes of both the jurisdiction where they 
practice and where their patients are located should be granted. 
◦ If the surgeon truly does not believe that these procedures will beneﬁt his or her 
patients then traditional methods should be retained.
◦ Full approval from the ethical/institutional review boards of both parties (remote and 
local site) involved must be obtained prior to initiating the surgery and 
Responsibilities must be clearly delineated.
◦ All details such as medical privileges and reimbursement for the surgeons and 
insurance coverage for the patient should be completed prior to undertaking this 
type of operations.
◦ The remote surgeon, in addition to the local surgeon, would have to accept liability 
for the perioperative welfare of patients.
◦  Measures to evaluate the quality of medical services must be in place, in order to 
ensure the highest standard diagnostic and treatment services are oﬀered to 
patients.
◦ In case of critical incidents such as intra-operative complication or even patient 
death, the responsibility of the owner of the robot should be also investigated.
Examples: 
• Tele-Radiology: the practice of a radiologist interpreting medical images while not 
physically present in the location where the images are generated (48 ).
• Tele-ECG: the Practice of a cardiologist interpreting and evaluating 
electrocardiogram, remotely taken by handheld tele-electrocardiogram while not 
physically present in the location where it is taken.
• Tele-Pathology: The use of telecommunications technology to facilitate the transfer of 
image-rich pathology data between remote locations for the purposes of diagnosis, 
education, and research.
Minimum requirements of: 
• Medico-Legal: 
◦ The images should be captured using the medico-legally accepted format and 
resolution 
◦ The images resolution should maintained unchanged during transfer or storage. 
◦ The professional should evaluate and study the images using a medico-legally 
accepted display device with the required resolution for each study category
◦ The studies should be labeled with patient and facility demography.
◦ The requests should be labeled based on urgency level by the requesting practitioner, 
to fulfill the required service level agreement (SLA).
◦ The professional should receive the required report about the case to perform proper 
evaluation.
◦ The professional should receive training on the devices used in the evaluation process 
such as diagnostic modality, and the display tools.
◦ The Medico-legal disputes resulting from the remote interpretation and / or Diagnosis 
of the HCP is similar that of the regular HCP practice within the healthcare facilities.
Telehealth Application Guidelines
48
• Setup:
◦ The robotic system and the communication system and link must be reliable, secure, 
and compliant with the Saudi data protection law, thus reducing the risk of interruptions 
to the connection.
◦ The surgical teams must also be able to provide eﬀective surgical care if systems fail or 
communication is lost.
◦  Assistant surgeon must be always present at the operating table.
◦ Technical and support team and backup plans must be ready during the surgery to 
maintain the speed and if any disconnection or other technical problem happens. 
◦ All systems and components should be interoperable. Both the remote site (location of 
surgeon) and the local site (patient location) must have system components that can 
cooperatively interact with other medical systems.
◦ Tele-surgery systems should be capable of robust interaction with supporting 
technologies such as imaging. Furthermore, all operating room systems should use 
hardware and software standards that facilitate interoperability.
◦ The robotic system should be proven to be used for each speciﬁc procedure and all 
accessories needed for that procedure should be available. In addition, the HCP should 
be trained for this procedure. 
• Personnel:
◦ The organization should have a licensing requirement and fully developed training 
programs and competency-based practice and guidelines for HCP practicing tele 
surgery and standard operating protocols (including that for equipment maintenance)
◦ The health care organization should be accredited and certiﬁed by CBAHI to perform 
and oﬀer Tele surgery service.
◦ Medical centers that oﬀer tele-surgery services must employ a specialist in the patient 
site that would deal with the intra and post-operative complications.
◦ The medical centers and doctors must have insurance that covers robotic 
assisted-surgery and tele surgery services. 
◦ Measures to evaluate the quality of medical services must be in place, in order to 
ensure the highest standard diagnostic and treatment services are oﬀered to patients.
◦ Physician should be fully aware of the rationale behind, the limitations (including 
patient’s clinical evaluation, technology failure, and remote monitoring limitations) and 
alternative options must be understood when providing telehealth to avert disputes and 
minimize legal risks.
Telehealth Application Guidelines
49
• Patient experience and patient rights:
◦ The images should be stored and transferred using technology that provide the 
required privacy and conﬁdentiality.
◦ Patient consent should be taken, as Patients may need for a tele-Diagnosis at any 
time. 
◦ HCPs practicing tele-diagnosis should respect their obligations and ethical 
responsibilities
◦ The secondary used of the patient unidentiﬁed data should follow the governmental 
governance and regulation (IRB approval) in that regard. 
◦ The secondary use of identity bounded patients data for research requires the 
patient approvals.
• Technical: 
◦ The devices used for study evaluation should provide the minimum medico-legally 
accepted resolution for each of study.
◦ The devices used for evaluation should be calibrated in frequent manner, based on 
the manufacturing recommendation, to maintain the accuracy and performance
• Patient experience and patient rights:
◦ Patients should be fully informed of the rationale behind, the limitations (including the 
possibility of intra or post-operative complication, and technology failure), and 
alternative options available when choosing tele surgery in order to avert disputes and 
minimize legal risks.
◦ HCPs practicing tele surgery should follow medical ethical principles, maintain 
conﬁdentiality and privacy, quality of the medical services, take patient’s valid consent 
and providing all the information the patient wants or needs to make an informed 
decision, collecting and storage of data relating to the medical act.
◦ Patient has the right to refuse doing the operation under the tele surgery approach. 
◦ Tele surgery should not be anonymous: both patient and tele surgeon need to know 
each other’s identity.
◦ HCP must exercise due diligence in protecting patients' data when using 
telecommunication devices, transmitting data to third parties (e.g., other healthcare 
professionals) and follow the governmental governance and regulation in that regards.  
◦ Patient records, reports, documents, images, diagnostics, data etc. (Digital or 
non-Digital) utilized in the tele surgery should be retained by the HCP at the patient ﬁle 
in both sites. 
• Technical: 
◦ Latency time which is deﬁned as the time delay in transferring auditory, visual, and even 
tactile feedback between the two distant locations it is ideal to be less than 100  
milliseconds.
◦ Availability of connectivity must be similar to the availability of electricity in the 
operation rooms; both locations must have redundancy in connectivity by having a DIA 
(dedicated internet access) with the required speed from at least two diﬀerent 
aggregators, and avoid any intra-facility points of failure.
◦ A healthcare facility that has the tele-surgery machine must deﬁne a Quality of service 
(QoS) and take in consideration the level of the LAN network within the facility and the 
Wide area networking (WAN) to assure the quality of audio and video.
◦ Secure, and encrypted high-speed data connections with suﬃcient bandwidth and 
high-quality audio-visual systems are required.
◦ The technology must have haptic feedback that enables transmission of tactile 
information to the tele-operator.
◦ The equipment, devices, and system quality and safety should be routinely assessed 
based on the manufacturing recommendation, to maintain the accuracy and 
performance.
Telehealth Application Guidelines
50
Remote patient monitoring:
Deﬁnition: 
Remote patient monitoring (RPM) is a technology that enables monitoring of patients 
outside a conventional clinical setting, such as home or a remote area to trigger clinical 
interventions as needed. The technology increases access to care at the right time and 
decreases healthcare delivery costs (49,50).
Description: 
RPM is the use of digital technologies to monitor and capture medical and other health 
information from patients. Also, electronically transmit this information to HCP for 
assessment, recommendations and instructions, if needed.
RPM allows HCP to continue tracking healthcare data from patients if they are 
discharged or at home. It also encourages patients to observe their health status.
Examples: 
• Blood pressure monitor: With remote blood pressure monitors, HCP can perform 
ongoing virtual monitoring and enables the treatment of hypertension/high blood 
pressure
• Blood glucose monitor: Practitioners can use the data captured by a remote blood 
glucose-monitoring device to detect potential alarming changes in glucose levels 
and take immediate action.
• Spirometry testing: plays an essential role in diagnosing lung diseases as well as 
assessing and monitoring conditions virtually such as asthma and chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Minimum requirements of: 
• Medico-Legal: 
◦ Intermittent readings of RPM tools for patients that need continuous monitoring 
cannot be accepted, and the frequency of monitoring intervals should be conﬁgured 
as per each patient clinical requirements. 
◦ Integration minimum requirements as the NHIC interoperability standards.
◦ Safety and security measures should be applied on the service at all stages 
(collection, transfer, and store).
◦ A clear plan for the remotely monitored patient should be designed by his primary 
physician for the accepted normal parameters range and advices for the 
interventions for the common expected problems and when the patient requires a 
hospital admission.
Tele-assistance:
Deﬁnition: 
Tele-Assistance (TLA) is a synchronous remote technical or medical expert support 
provided by a healthcare professional (HCP) at the patient site -such as a doctor or a 
nurse- to a requesting HCP during a technical intervention. 
Description:
The use of telecommunications technology to assist the requesting HCP to manage the 
patient’s condition remotely. Such assistance might include interpreting laboratory or 
diagnostic studies, planning a therapeutic or a palliative care plan. In addition, it can 
facilitate transfer of the patient to a higher level of care or transfer of HCPs, medical 
equipment, blood products, test samples, organs, etc. to the bedside.
AI: can assist practitioners and enhance their capabilities
Examples:
• Tele-ICU: a critical care expert provides further management guidance to a non-critical 
care physician.
• Tele-EM: an emergency medicine expert provides further management guidance for a 
HCP working in an emergency department.
• Tele-case management: Groups of experts receive and manage requests for patient’s 
transfer between healthcare facilities.
• Tele-operation: remote advisory support during surgical operations or clinical 
procedures.
• Tele-mentoring: Enables a remote specialist surgeon to guide and/or monitor surgeon(s) 
to act as instructor for surgeons who actually performing the surgery at a remote patient 
end. It facilitates training sessions by experienced surgeons. 
• Online medical control for Emergency Medical Services: an emergency-medicine 
expert provides further care instructions to pre-hospital providers during patient 
transfer.
Telehealth Application Guidelines
51
• Setup:
Most RPM technologies follow a general architecture that consists of the components 
below:   
◦ Sensors on a device that is enabled by wireless communications to measure 
physiological parameters. Any device that is responsible of detecting one of the 
targeted parameters to measure must be certiﬁed and graded by SFDA.
◦ Sensors must be connected to a central database by Wi-Fi or cellular 
communication protocols depending on the manufacturer.
◦ Local data storage at patients’ site that interfaces between sensors and other 
centralized data repository and/or healthcare facilities.
◦ Centralized repository to store data sent from sensors, local data storage, 
diagnostic applications, and/or healthcare facilities.
◦ Diagnostic application software that develops treatment recommendations and 
intervention alerts based on the analysis of collected data
•   Personnel:
◦ The professional should receive a proper training that insures eﬀective 
tele-monitoring delivery 
◦ The healthcare facility should be licensed to perform Remote patient monitoring 
service.
◦ Patients should be educated on the device pre-hospital discharge. 
•   Patient experience and patient rights:
◦ HCPs practicing Remote patient monitoring should respect their obligations and 
ethical responsibilities.
◦ Patient should be consented prior to using the RPM tool. 
◦ The patient must educated about the expected outcome, instruction of use, 
indication, automated reporting method, basic troubleshooting skills.
◦ Scheduled calls and checkups to make sure the patient follows the instructions of 
use.
Minimum requirements of:
• Medico-legal:
◦ The request for tele-assistance shall be treated as a consultation and documented as 
such; Documentation of the exchange between the requesting and the assisting HCP 
shall be a permanent part of the patient care record. 
◦ The tele-assistance exchange shall contain the patient identiﬁers such as name or ID 
number to access the patient clinical data with minimal level needed to cover the 
speciﬁc encounter. Such as transferred documented information, access to the 
information EMR, recorded telephone calls by repeating of the medical information 
between the HCPs. 
◦ Patient safety is the ultimate responsibility of the HCP at the bedside. Any interventions 
proposed by the remote HCP shall be viewed as recommendations that are subject to 
the limits of practice imposed on the HCP at the bedside by license, privileges, 
protocols, scope of practice, certiﬁcations, etc.   
◦ The burden of describing the patient complete condition that contains all the details 
pertinent to the assistance requested falls on the requesting HCP and the assisting 
HCP shall not be held liable for assistance provided based on incomplete consultation.
◦ Following recommended interventions and their eﬀect is a shared responsibility 
between requesting HCP and the assisting HCP .
◦ Exchange of data shall be governed by the same overarching guidelines on privacy, 
security and accurate representation of truth e.g. high-quality imagery of diagnostic 
studies, body parts, etc. 
◦ Medico-legal disputes resulting from tele-assistance shall be arbitrated as if the consult 
was conducted physically at the place of work for the requested HCP based on his 
contribution, based on the data received. 
• Setup:
◦ Healthcare facilities receiving TLA requests on regular basis may elect to develop 
protocols to minimize variability of care provided. 
◦ It is preferred that the assisting HCP keeps a record of cases discussed and 
recommendations given. The cases must be documented, and both parties should 
have an agreed report.
◦ The assisting HCP is not required to be located in a designated site and can be 
anywhere.
Telehealth Application Guidelines
52
• Personnel:
◦ Requesting and assisting HCPs shall have formal training on protocols, communication 
equipment utilization, and the limitations of requesting and assisting HCPs.
◦ Requesting and assisting HCPs shall have knowledge on available equipment, and 
expertise at requesting and requested facilities.
◦ All patients are illegible for TLA provided that:
▪ Requesting HCP needs further assistance.
▪ Assisting HCP can provide the requested assistance. 
▪ Such assistance does not exist at the bedside unless in case of capacity issues. 
◦ The following shall not be considered a reason for TLA request:
▪ Second opinion or tele-expertise requests.
▪ Transfer of care requests is not a service used mainly for the purpose of transferring the 
case to another hospital.
▪ Patient or family requests.
▪ Requested for social reasons. 
• Patient experience and patient rights: 
• Patients shall be informed of the result of the TLA request, the requested HCP details 
and credentials.
◦ Patients shall not be subject to ‘ﬁrst experience’ interventions where the requesting 
HCP is taking remote instructions on how to perform a procedure or an intervention that 
he is not trained on. An exception can be made with complete informed consent of the 
patient or their representative in extreme circumstances where it is the only way to save 
a life or prevent permanent damage.
 
• Technical:
◦ Some of the tools and devices used during an encounter might be subjected to 
certiﬁcation. 
Tele-management:
Deﬁnition:
Tele-management is the remote management of inpatients by remote HCPs.
Description:
Utilizing telemedicine technology in order to provide a complete management of inpatients 
remotely. Tele-management provides a better care management in case of scarce or no 
medical resources adapted to patient needs on patient site. Where a credentialed and 
privileged HCP is in charge of managing patients admitted in a remote hospital with an 
accessibility to the patient medical record and streaming of clinical information required to 
perform this responsibility (for example, vital signs, ECG, ventilators parameters, two-way 
video communication and accessing the monitors of evaluations tools.) based on the case 
and the performed rules.
Examples:
• Tele-ICU: a remote expert team manages an intensive care unit without intensivist 
physicians on site through Tele-ICU technologies.
• Tele-Stroke: a neurologist manages a stroke patient remotely from another center, 
starting from evaluation, diagnosis, and treatment.
• Tele-Round: a HCP managing patients remotely using robotics technology for routine 
rounds, utilizing connected clinical evaluation devices such as camera, Stethoscope, 
Otoscope, Ophthalmoscope, endoscope, thermometer, pulse-oximeter and 
sphygmomanometer.
Minimum requirements of:
• Medico-legal:
◦ Similar to regular clinical practice, managing HCP should continuously write his 
documentation in the patient medical record including all the clinical evaluations, notes, 
diagnosis, healthcare professionals communication, hand-oﬀs, physician orders and 
treatment.
◦ Communication between HCPs should be documented using electronic means.
◦ Any addendum or amendment occur on the physician orders should be communicated 
to the HCP at the patient site, documented, time stamped and e-signed.
◦ There should be the ability to access and review current data from both the 
tele-managing physician and bedside HCP to facilitate communication and decision 
making process.
◦ HCP at the patient site should have a full capability to perform the expected emergency 
procedures that may occur for the admitted patient according to the patient needs 
and/or orders/instructions of the remote managing HCP .
◦ Alternative communication method should be available between the two HCPs in the 
remote and the patient’s sites (such as landline or mobile phone) to be used in case of 
disconnect of the tele-management communication system.
Telehealth Application Guidelines
53
• Setup:
◦ A uniﬁed electronic medical record (EMR) is preferred to be used for both the remote 
healthcare site and the patient site. Otherwise, the integration between the multiple 
systems should have instant synchronization to avoid latency between orders and 
administrations of medication or performance of the orders.
◦ Technology should be able to optimize audio and visual clarity for enhancement of 
clinical assessment. options include:
▪ Real time
▪ Two-way/one-way high-deﬁnition audio-visual solutions
▪ Zooming capability and day lighting to support visual evaluation
▪ Audio support via traditional phone access as a backup alternative line.
◦ Adequate telecommunications bandwidth and security to connect near and far end 
equipment.
◦ Adequate telecommunications availability should be provided based on the 
criticality of the services provided.
• Personnel:
◦ HCPs providing tele-management services shall have the necessary clinical 
preparation, orientation and ongoing education to ensure they possess the 
necessary competencies to promote quality care and patient safety.
• Patient experience and patient rights:
◦ All remotely managed inpatients and families shall receive information, which 
includes the role and beneﬁt in using the tele-management services in improving 
patient care and assure the conﬁdentiality, availability and safety of this technology.
Tele-expertise:
Deﬁnition: 
The use of telecommunications technology to facilitate the remote expert medical opinion 
provided by an expert HCP to a requesting HCP relying on store-and-forward (24).
Description: 
Utilizing telecommunications capabilities to upload patient clinical information 
(store-and-forward) which may include ﬁlling speciﬁc forms, detailed clinical reports, 
multimedia content, investigation results and details about previous course of treatment 
and receive from the expert practitioners or centers an oﬃcial recommendations or second 
opinion that may include diagnosis, suggested treatment.
Examples: 
Tele-dermatology: A HCP or a patient asks a dermatologist an expert advice on the 
patient’s medical situation with a relevant clinical information and pictures of lesions and 
the level of urgency. The expert replies with the diagnosis, a potential treatment and if the 
patient needs further investigations or to be referred to the dermatologist.
Tele-second opinion: Utilizing telecommunications capabilities by HCPs or patients to 
upload patient clinical information which may include speciﬁc forms, clinical reports, 
multimedia content, investigation results and details about previous course of treatment 
and receive an oﬃcial recommendations or second opinion that may include diagnosis, 
suggested treatment from expert practitioner or center.
Telehealth Application Guidelines
54
• Technical:
◦ Devices shall have up-to-date ﬁrmware and security requirement.
◦ Healthcare professional’s personal computer or mobile device has the latest 
security patches and updates applied to the operating system and third party 
applications.
◦ Mobile devices should be conﬁgured to utilize an inactivity timeout function that 
requires a passphrase or re-authentication to access the device after the timeout 
threshold has been exceeded. Timeout should not exceed 15 minutes.
◦ Unauthorized persons shall not be allowed access to sensitive information stored on 
the device, or use the device to access sensitive applications or network resources.
◦ Healthcare and institutional IT professionals should have the capability to remotely 
disable or remove data from any mobile device containing PHI or sensitive 
institutional data, should the device be lost or stolen.
◦ Remote management of the system should permit far end camera control (FECC), 
maintenance or diagnostic capabilities such as auto restart, remote conﬁguration, 
proactive monitoring and/or alerts(51,52).
◦ System should allow point-to-point connectivity from within or outside of the 
healthcare facility.
◦ Audio and video transmission secure by using point-to-point encryption that meets 
recognized and accepted standards based on local standards.
◦ Proper testing and maintenance for all functionalities for each system upgrade, 
newly installed ﬁrmware, new infrastructure or endpoint.
◦ Implement planned and unplanned downtime procedures that ensure continued 
service and may include the use of appropriate backup technologies.
◦ Documentation, storage, and retrieval of health records consistent with the 
organizational, industry and governmental standards.
◦ Seamless ﬂow of information between patient information systems to enhance 
clinical support and promote continuity of care. 
Minimum requirements of: 
• Medico-Legal:
◦ If the patient need to be examined by the expert physically, a referral should be advised.
◦ The medical report should be written to include all the information regarding the patient 
case.
◦ The medical questions or requests should be deﬁned precisely 
◦ all uploaded clinical information should be sent in a clear and easy way to read 
◦ The medical report should be maintained unchanged during transfer or storage. 
◦ The medical report should be labeled with patient and facility demography.
◦ the degree of emergency of the request should be deﬁned 
◦ the request should be related to the expert specialty 
◦ Tele-expertise may not be suitable for emergency cases which needs urgent 
intervention 
◦ All legal requirements applied to a HCP in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia shall be applied 
to the practice of tele-expertise. 
◦ The remote HCP should provide a service under a registered remote healthcare facility 
that have an oﬃcial legally bounded agreement with a registered local healthcare 
facility. The HCP should be licensed and registered based on SCFHS and other the 
local policies in KSA. 
• Setup:
◦ Tele-expertise requests are non-scheduled telehealth activities. The expert HCP may 
however schedule a dedicated time to reply to the requests or answer one by one 
based on his own agenda, availability, and urgency.
◦ The professional should receive training on the devices used in the evaluation 
process .
Telehealth Application Guidelines
55
• Personnel:
◦ The professional should receive the required report about the case to perform proper 
evaluation.
◦ HCPs shall be trained on telehealth before practicing tele-expertise.
◦ The HCP should gather all relevant administrative and medical information.
◦ During a tele-expertise, both HCPs shall engage their responsibility based on their 
individual contribution. 
◦ HCPs practicing tele-expertise should respect their obligations and ethical 
responsibilities
• Patient experience and patient rights:
◦ The medical report and patient details should be stored and transferred using 
technology that provide the required privacy and conﬁdentiality.
◦ patient consent should be taken 
◦ A patient approval is required before any third-party participation in evaluating patient 
reports. 
◦ Patients may refuse and/or cancel any participation to a tele-expertise activity, at any 
time, without the need to provide justiﬁcation.
• Technical:
◦ The request form should be automated, tagged in a way to notify the urgency level of 
the case and the specialty needed.
Tele-Surgery: 
Deﬁnition: 
Any remote surgical procedure performed by a surgeon or a surgical team, at any 
distance from the patient and theatre. 
Note: When remote HCPs provide synchronous support during a surgery or 
intervention to another HCPs performing at the patient site, this is not tele-surgery but 
tele-assistance.
Description:
• Tele surgery uses wireless networking and robotic technology to allow surgeons 
(HCP) to operate on patients who are distantly located, by combining advances in 
imaging, video, robotics and sensors, the system gives surgeon the full sensory 
experience of hands-on surgery. The surgeon performs the operation sitting at a 
console that displays a high-resolution image of the patient. Allows collaboration 
and assistance between senior-to-senior and senior to junior surgeons in providing 
a variety of advanced surgical care to patient at rural or any distant site. 
• AI might have a role in augmentation of surgeon for performing automated surgeries.
Examples:
• Tele-proctoring and tele-accreditation: extensions of tele-mentoring, involve 
educational or professional assessment techniques for documentation and granting 
privileges. 
• •Tele-robotics: It is an application of robotic surgery where the surgeon performs the 
surgery with the help of a surgical robotic system, locally or remotely that permit 
surgeon to operate on patient using robotic system and instrument like robotic arm 
e.g., Laparoscopic surgery. The relationship between the tele robot and the surgeon 
called Master-Slave relationship.
• Tele-presence: Is a novel technology allowing the surgeon to perform a surgery 
without seeing or touching the patient directly, it is a computerized interface at the 
surgical workstation in the remote operative site (53). Technology of telepresence 
creates an illusion for the surgeon, giving him or her a feel of a complete immersion 
into another environment, which could be real or synthetic. Through the virtual 
reality, the surgeon will feel like he is in a real environment using the tele robot to 
telecast their hand motion by conveying sensory feedbacks like sight, haptic, and 
acoustic to the remote operating room. e.g., vascular surgery, organ excision in 
trauma surgery (54–59). 
Telehealth Application Guidelines
56
Tele-education:
Deﬁnition: 
Tele-education represents health education on distance, using Information 
Communication Technologies (ICT), as well as continuous education of a health system 
beneﬁciaries and use of electronic libraries, databases or electronic data with databases 
of knowledge (60).
Description: 
A healthcare professional may convey health promotion and disease prevention 
messages. These could be related to diet, physical activity, and cessation of smoking, 
contagious infections. Similarly, he/ she may give advice on immunizations, exercises, 
hygiene practices.
A healthcare professional may have an access to a continuous educational materials, 
electronic libraries, databases, and live educational sessions.
Examples: 
• General diseases education (Diabetes Mellitus, Hypertension, Bronchial Asthma, etc.)
• Using Interactive videoconferencing.
• Tele-mentoring and other forms of individual teaching (personalized education), 
(coaching).
• Lectures delivered through satellite broadcasts to multiple sites. 
• Nudging in order to motivate people to adopt healthy behaviors without incentives or 
deterrent.
Applications:
• Provides high-quality surgery to medically underserved locations such as rural 
areas, battleﬁelds, spacecraft, and peripheral hospitals.
• Allows for surgical collaboration amongst surgeons at diﬀerent medical centers in 
real-time.
• Training and mentoring new surgeons.
 
Minimum requirements of: 
• Medico-Legal:
◦ Licensure requirements and regulatory regimes of both the jurisdiction where they 
practice and where their patients are located should be granted. 
◦ If the surgeon truly does not believe that these procedures will beneﬁt his or her 
patients then traditional methods should be retained.
◦ Full approval from the ethical/institutional review boards of both parties (remote and 
local site) involved must be obtained prior to initiating the surgery and 
Responsibilities must be clearly delineated.
◦ All details such as medical privileges and reimbursement for the surgeons and 
insurance coverage for the patient should be completed prior to undertaking this 
type of operations.
◦ The remote surgeon, in addition to the local surgeon, would have to accept liability 
for the perioperative welfare of patients.
◦  Measures to evaluate the quality of medical services must be in place, in order to 
ensure the highest standard diagnostic and treatment services are oﬀered to 
patients.
◦ In case of critical incidents such as intra-operative complication or even patient 
death, the responsibility of the owner of the robot should be also investigated.
Telehealth Application Guidelines
57
Minimum requirements of: 
• Medico-Legal:
◦ Being aware of legislation, professional, and regulatory and licensing requirements that 
inﬂuence the delivery of educational information.
◦ In organizations providing educational information, there should be senior management 
accountability for such information, including the supervision of all persons directly 
responsible for developing, coordinating, and operating Tele-education services.
◦ Organizations providing Tele-education services must have policies and procedures in 
place to protect the data and conﬁdentiality of information. Tele-education security 
policy and procedures should be integrated with those for electronic health records, 
whenever possible.
◦ There should be policies and procedures for documentation, storage and retrieval of 
patient records that respect the conﬁdentiality of the information.
◦ Tele-education consultation should not be anonymous: both patient and the healthcare 
professional need to know each other’s identity (61).
◦ Healthcare professional should obtain informed consent, which may be implied or 
expressed before starting any service or intervention following principles and 
processes similar to standard practice for the particular healthcare service.
◦ Explicit consent should be obtained from the patient for medical acts that would 
normally require explicit consent in the traditional health care setting (e.g. video or 
audio recording of the sessions, use of data for research or educational purposes) (62).
◦ Healthcare professional should share relevant information with the patient and 
caregiver, as appropriate, before the beginning of any Tele-education interaction. This 
information includes informing the patient of the objective of the Tele-education 
interaction, the role and responsibility of the provider and the patient during the 
Tele-education interaction, other people participating in this interaction.
Telehealth Application Guidelines
58
• Setup:
◦ Platform and sessions for patient education should fulﬁl the required privacy and 
conﬁdentially measures in the kingdom.
• Patient experience and patient rights:
◦ Education material provided should be created and reviewed by subject matter experts 
in the ﬁeld of the content provided and documenting the approving body.
◦ Education material should be maintained up to date and each content should have an 
expiry date when it is going to be subject for review.
◦ The evaluation parameters for the educational content are as follows: patient outcomes 
and satisfactions, provider satisfaction, quality of illustration content, clarity of the 
content and consumer completion of the content
◦ HCPs ethical conduct should not be compromised in all telehealth educational 
sessions. 
◦ Patients’ rights and conﬁdentiality should strictly preserved in all telehealth educational 
sessions.
• Technical:
◦ Technical requirements must be appropriate and ﬁt for purpose to eﬀectively transfer 
audio and visual data in real time and any interactions between the Provider-end and 
the Receiver-end during the tele-educational session. 
◦ Software and hardware capability and suitability for the use of a tele-education setting 
for diﬀerent purposes and scenarios may require a compatibility between the software 
and the diﬀerent hardware tools such as computers, smartphones, laptops, tablets.  
◦ Adopt a process of continuous monitoring and testing the used tele-education 
solutions, networks and devices in a frequency that prevent any failures during the 
real-time session and proactively discover and provide the support for any 
troubleshooting required instantly.
Telehealth Application Guidelines
59
Cross-border access:
Deﬁnition:
Cross-border tele-health is the provision of healthcare services involves medical 
practice and information and communications technology. Cross border tele-health 
allows healthcare to be provided at distance, opening the door for healthcare services 
to be provided by a health professional who lives in a country other than the patient’s 
(63).
Description:
• When a patient is requesting a consultation from a healthcare professional who is 
located outside Saudi Arabia, whether using a synchronous (video consultation, 
tele-triaging, tele-education, tele-management, RPM) or asynchronous, 
store-and-forward (tele-expertise, tele-education)
• When a HCP requesting a service from another HCP who is located outside Saudi 
Arabia and vice versa, whether using a synchronous (tele-assistance, 
tele-management, tele-surgery, tele-education) or asynchronous, 
store-and-forward (tele-expertise, tele-diagnosis).
• The use of telehealth technical solutions and emerging technologies such as 
artiﬁcial intelligence (augmentation in screening) located in diﬀerent countries. 
Tele-assistance:
Deﬁnition: 
Tele-Assistance (TLA) is a synchronous remote technical or medical expert support 
provided by a healthcare professional (HCP) at the patient site -such as a doctor or a 
nurse- to a requesting HCP during a technical intervention. 
Description:
The use of telecommunications technology to assist the requesting HCP to manage the 
patient’s condition remotely. Such assistance might include interpreting laboratory or 
diagnostic studies, planning a therapeutic or a palliative care plan. In addition, it can 
facilitate transfer of the patient to a higher level of care or transfer of HCPs, medical 
equipment, blood products, test samples, organs, etc. to the bedside.
AI: can assist practitioners and enhance their capabilities
Examples:
• Tele-ICU: a critical care expert provides further management guidance to a non-critical 
care physician.
• Tele-EM: an emergency medicine expert provides further management guidance for a 
HCP working in an emergency department.
• Tele-case management: Groups of experts receive and manage requests for patient’s 
transfer between healthcare facilities.
• Tele-operation: remote advisory support during surgical operations or clinical 
procedures.
• Tele-mentoring: Enables a remote specialist surgeon to guide and/or monitor surgeon(s) 
to act as instructor for surgeons who actually performing the surgery at a remote patient 
end. It facilitates training sessions by experienced surgeons. 
• Online medical control for Emergency Medical Services: an emergency-medicine 
expert provides further care instructions to pre-hospital providers during patient 
transfer.
Telehealth Application Guidelines
60
Minimum requirements:
• Organizational:
◦ Telehealth services should only be provided by healthcare facilities that are licensed 
and complied with laws and regulations issued by relevant authority.
◦ The healthcare facility must provide the minimum requirements of healthcare 
practitioners, equipment, devices and technologies to provide telehealth services 
according to the relevant authority licensing guidelines for medical facilities. 
◦ The healthcare facility must have a formal agreement in place with the other healthcare 
facility.
◦ The healthcare facility shall be responsible to ensure that the partnering health facility, 
which is not subject to the relevant jurisdiction, is made aware of all the applicable laws 
and regulations for telehealth services and assure compliance across both 
jurisdictions. 
Examples:
Minimum requirements of:
• Medico-legal:
◦ The request for tele-assistance shall be treated as a consultation and documented as 
such; Documentation of the exchange between the requesting and the assisting HCP 
shall be a permanent part of the patient care record. 
◦ The tele-assistance exchange shall contain the patient identiﬁers such as name or ID 
number to access the patient clinical data with minimal level needed to cover the 
speciﬁc encounter. Such as transferred documented information, access to the 
information EMR, recorded telephone calls by repeating of the medical information 
between the HCPs. 
◦ Patient safety is the ultimate responsibility of the HCP at the bedside. Any interventions 
proposed by the remote HCP shall be viewed as recommendations that are subject to 
the limits of practice imposed on the HCP at the bedside by license, privileges, 
protocols, scope of practice, certiﬁcations, etc.   
◦ The burden of describing the patient complete condition that contains all the details 
pertinent to the assistance requested falls on the requesting HCP and the assisting 
HCP shall not be held liable for assistance provided based on incomplete consultation.
◦ Following recommended interventions and their eﬀect is a shared responsibility 
between requesting HCP and the assisting HCP .
◦ Exchange of data shall be governed by the same overarching guidelines on privacy, 
security and accurate representation of truth e.g. high-quality imagery of diagnostic 
studies, body parts, etc. 
◦ Medico-legal disputes resulting from tele-assistance shall be arbitrated as if the consult 
was conducted physically at the place of work for the requested HCP based on his 
contribution, based on the data received. 
• Setup:
◦ Healthcare facilities receiving TLA requests on regular basis may elect to develop 
protocols to minimize variability of care provided. 
◦ It is preferred that the assisting HCP keeps a record of cases discussed and 
recommendations given. The cases must be documented, and both parties should 
have an agreed report.
◦ The assisting HCP is not required to be located in a designated site and can be 
anywhere.
Classiﬁcation
Tele-consultation
Tele-expertise
Tele-assistance
Remote patient monitoring
Tele-surgery
Tele-diagnosis
Tele-management
Emerging technology (AI, 
mobile, block chain...)
Tele-education
Synchronous / asynchronous
Synchronous
Synchronous
Synchronous
Beneﬁciary with cross-border 
provider
Patient with HCP
Patient or HCP with HCP
HCP with HCP
Patient with HCP
Patient and HCP with HCP
HCP with HCP
Patient and HCP with HCP
Patient and/or HCP with 
technology provider
Patient or HCP with education 
provider
Synchronous
Both
Both
Synchronous
Asynchronous
Asynchronous
Telehealth Application Guidelines
61
• Personnel:
◦ Requesting and assisting HCPs shall have formal training on protocols, communication 
equipment utilization, and the limitations of requesting and assisting HCPs.
◦ Requesting and assisting HCPs shall have knowledge on available equipment, and 
expertise at requesting and requested facilities.
◦ All patients are illegible for TLA provided that:
▪ Requesting HCP needs further assistance.
▪ Assisting HCP can provide the requested assistance. 
▪ Such assistance does not exist at the bedside unless in case of capacity issues. 
◦ The following shall not be considered a reason for TLA request:
▪ Second opinion or tele-expertise requests.
▪ Transfer of care requests is not a service used mainly for the purpose of transferring the 
case to another hospital.
▪ Patient or family requests.
▪ Requested for social reasons. 
• Patient experience and patient rights: 
• Patients shall be informed of the result of the TLA request, the requested HCP details 
and credentials.
◦ Patients shall not be subject to ‘ﬁrst experience’ interventions where the requesting 
HCP is taking remote instructions on how to perform a procedure or an intervention that 
he is not trained on. An exception can be made with complete informed consent of the 
patient or their representative in extreme circumstances where it is the only way to save 
a life or prevent permanent damage.
 
• Technical:
◦ Some of the tools and devices used during an encounter might be subjected to 
certiﬁcation. 
• Healthcare Professional:
◦ The remote HCPs are required to be licensed and registered based on SCFHS and 
other local policies in KSA
◦ Liability issues should be discussed and settled before engaging in any telehealth 
activity.
◦ The health professional who provides telehealth services should be aﬃliated with 
licensed healthcare facility.
◦ The licensed remote HCP should provide a service under a registered remote 
healthcare facility that have an oﬃcial legally bounded agreement with a registered local 
healthcare facility.
◦ KSA HCP must be licensed or registered with the regulator in the patient’s jurisdiction if 
required.
◦ The healthcare professional must be aware about the approach, law and culture of the 
country receiving service.
The healthcare professional must complete training requirements.
• Information and technology:
◦ Healthcare professionals shall have access to all relevant patient records relevant to the 
practice of cross border telehealth services. 
◦ Healthcare facilities shall provide secure, private and conﬁdential workspace to 
safeguard patient privacy and during patient information exchange.
◦ Cross-border telehealth services shall be compliant with health information exchange 
policy, including all relevant data security, privacy requirements and level of sensitivity.
◦ Each healthcare facility is responsible for the availability and completeness of data 
when expected and needed.
◦ The healthcare facility should comply with the patient’s country set of principles and 
processes in applying telehealth services.
◦ The healthcare facility should comply with the patient’s country personal data 
protection laws.
◦ The healthcare professional should follow patient documentation rules as agreed 
between two healthcare facilities, fulﬁlling safety and clinical best practice.
◦ There are many international standards for privacy information management and 
information security management systems such as HIPAA, ISO/IEC 27701, ISO/IEC 
27001 and ISO/IEC 27002, facilities from both countries should agree on implementing 
any of these international standards.
◦ Emerging technology in cross-border may require additional measures in privacy and 
conﬁdentiality that enforce exchanging de-identiﬁed (anonymized) clinical information 
in line with the data protection law requirements
Telehealth Application Guidelines
62
• Legal:
◦ In tortious claims jurisdiction is decided on the basis of the place where harm 
occurred as a result of the tort (that is to say, a result of a negligent act or failure to 
act). The applicable law will normally be the law of the jurisdiction in which the tort 
was committed.
◦ The healthcare facility shall ensure malpractice insurance for healthcare professionals 
is in place throughout the duration of the telehealth service.
◦ Healthcare professionals shall be responsible based on their individual contribution. 
◦ The physicians have the right to refuse a case if the quality and the quantity of the 
data provided in the patient record are not suﬃcient to give a complete and accurate 
medical opinion or if the quality of the images is insuﬃcient.
◦ The patient has to give informed consent for the exchange of his patient ﬁle and 
medical data.
◦ Patient consent should cover the possibility of having a HCP present outside Saudi 
Arabia.
◦ Patients are entitled to a written or electronic medical record of their treatment, and 
access to at least a copy of this record.
◦ The local healthcare facility involved in cross-border telehealth activities should 
guarantee that there is no abuse, malpractice nor ethical issues during cross-border 
telehealth practice.
◦ The local healthcare facility involved in cross-border telehealth activities should have 
a bounding agreement that hold both parties committed and accountable to the 
national requirements and regulations in a constant manner.
◦ A translator should be present in case of language barrier to avoid misinterpretations 
during the consultation session between the HCP and the patient. 
Tele-expertise:
Deﬁnition: 
The use of telecommunications technology to facilitate the remote expert medical opinion 
provided by an expert HCP to a requesting HCP relying on store-and-forward (24).
Description: 
Utilizing telecommunications capabilities to upload patient clinical information 
(store-and-forward) which may include ﬁlling speciﬁc forms, detailed clinical reports, 
multimedia content, investigation results and details about previous course of treatment 
and receive from the expert practitioners or centers an oﬃcial recommendations or second 
opinion that may include diagnosis, suggested treatment.
Examples: 
Tele-dermatology: A HCP or a patient asks a dermatologist an expert advice on the 
patient’s medical situation with a relevant clinical information and pictures of lesions and 
the level of urgency. The expert replies with the diagnosis, a potential treatment and if the 
patient needs further investigations or to be referred to the dermatologist.
Tele-second opinion: Utilizing telecommunications capabilities by HCPs or patients to 
upload patient clinical information which may include speciﬁc forms, clinical reports, 
multimedia content, investigation results and details about previous course of treatment 
and receive an oﬃcial recommendations or second opinion that may include diagnosis, 
suggested treatment from expert practitioner or center.
Telehealth Application Guidelines
63
Minimum requirements of: 
• Medico-Legal:
◦ If the patient need to be examined by the expert physically, a referral should be advised.
◦ The medical report should be written to include all the information regarding the patient 
case.
◦ The medical questions or requests should be deﬁned precisely 
◦ all uploaded clinical information should be sent in a clear and easy way to read 
◦ The medical report should be maintained unchanged during transfer or storage. 
◦ The medical report should be labeled with patient and facility demography.
◦ the degree of emergency of the request should be deﬁned 
◦ the request should be related to the expert specialty 
◦ Tele-expertise may not be suitable for emergency cases which needs urgent 
intervention 
◦ All legal requirements applied to a HCP in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia shall be applied 
to the practice of tele-expertise. 
◦ The remote HCP should provide a service under a registered remote healthcare facility 
that have an oﬃcial legally bounded agreement with a registered local healthcare 
facility. The HCP should be licensed and registered based on SCFHS and other the 
local policies in KSA. 
• Setup:
◦ Tele-expertise requests are non-scheduled telehealth activities. The expert HCP may 
however schedule a dedicated time to reply to the requests or answer one by one 
based on his own agenda, availability, and urgency.
◦ The professional should receive training on the devices used in the evaluation 
process .
Emerging Technologies in Telehealth:
Deﬁnition: 
• The use of new and novel telecommunications and information technology to provide 
access to health assessment, screening, diagnosis, intervention, collaboration, 
consultation, supervision, coaching and information across distance.
Description: 
• In addition to virtual visits using telemedicine, there are several emerging technologies 
including wearable technology (e.g., to monitor activity and vital signs), RPM (e.g., 
environmental exposures and medication adherence) as well as electronic medical 
records augmented with clinical decision support (64).
• The artiﬁcial intelligence introduced augmentation to multiple clinical services such as 
patient online tele-triaging to guide him to the appropriate service and giving the 
required safe recommendations, also, it is used in screening imaging of the retina of the 
patients and give a detailed medical report about many retinal problems. In addition, it 
is used to screen other images such as histopathology, chest x-rays, mammogram and 
other diagnostic imaging to screen for speciﬁc diseases or general augmentation for 
radiologists.
• Augmented reality and virtual reality is used in tele-education and potentially can be 
used in other purposes.
• Social media for mass education and nudging.
Examples: 
• Artiﬁcial intelligence
• Augmented reality (AR) and virtual reality (VR) 
• Tele-robots
• The Internet of Things (IoT) 
• Nanotechnology
• Mobile
• Block chain
• Cloud computing
Telehealth Application Guidelines
64
• Personnel:
◦ The professional should receive the required report about the case to perform proper 
evaluation.
◦ HCPs shall be trained on telehealth before practicing tele-expertise.
◦ The HCP should gather all relevant administrative and medical information.
◦ During a tele-expertise, both HCPs shall engage their responsibility based on their 
individual contribution. 
◦ HCPs practicing tele-expertise should respect their obligations and ethical 
responsibilities
• Patient experience and patient rights:
◦ The medical report and patient details should be stored and transferred using 
technology that provide the required privacy and conﬁdentiality.
◦ patient consent should be taken 
◦ A patient approval is required before any third-party participation in evaluating patient 
reports. 
◦ Patients may refuse and/or cancel any participation to a tele-expertise activity, at any 
time, without the need to provide justiﬁcation.
• Technical:
◦ The request form should be automated, tagged in a way to notify the urgency level of 
the case and the specialty needed.
Minimum requirements of: 
• Medico-Legal:
◦ All novel technologies should be registered either the SFDA or any other medical 
devices registration authorities.
◦ Healthcare professionals should obtain informed consent from the patient for the use of 
these emerging technologies.
• Setup:
◦ The Healthcare facilities must apply their safety procedures and protocols to 
Telemedicine services, when using all novel technologies.
• Technical:
◦ The novel technology use should be secured by design.
◦ Privacy and conﬁdentiality measures should be maintained.
• Personnel:
◦ Healthcare professionals providing Telemedicine services using novel technologies 
should have the necessary education, training/orientation and ongoing professional 
development needed for the safe provision of quality health services.
◦ Each healthcare facility should be aware of best practices relating to Telemedicine and 
adapt and change processes as such practices evolve. 
• Patient experience and patient rights:
◦ Some evaluation parameters may include patient outcomes and satisfaction, provider 
satisfaction; technical quality of service; quality of communication; performance 
metrics; costs; utilization; and improved access to care.  
◦ HCPs ethical conduct should not be compromised in the use of any of the novel 
telehealth solutions. 
◦ Patients’ rights, privacy and conﬁdentiality should strictly preserved in all novel 
telehealth solutions.
Telehealth Application Guidelines
65
Tele-education:
Deﬁnition: 
Tele-education represents health education on distance, using Information 
Communication Technologies (ICT), as well as continuous education of a health system 
beneﬁciaries and use of electronic libraries, databases or electronic data with databases 
of knowledge (60).
Description: 
A healthcare professional may convey health promotion and disease prevention 
messages. These could be related to diet, physical activity, and cessation of smoking, 
contagious infections. Similarly, he/ she may give advice on immunizations, exercises, 
hygiene practices.
A healthcare professional may have an access to a continuous educational materials, 
electronic libraries, databases, and live educational sessions.
Examples: 
• General diseases education (Diabetes Mellitus, Hypertension, Bronchial Asthma, etc.)
• Using Interactive videoconferencing.
• Tele-mentoring and other forms of individual teaching (personalized education), 
(coaching).
• Lectures delivered through satellite broadcasts to multiple sites. 
• Nudging in order to motivate people to adopt healthy behaviors without incentives or 
deterrent.
Appendix:
Appendix A:
Privacy and conﬁdentiality of health information: 
The Saudi personal data protection law, which is based on the following principles (14):
• Principle 1- Accountability: Data Controller's privacy policies and procedures shall be 
identiﬁed, documented and approved by the head of entity (or his designee) and 
circulated to all concerned parties.
• Principle 2- Transparency: A notice of Data Controller's privacy policies and 
procedures – Privacy Notice – shall be drawn up indicating the purposes for which 
personal data will be collected in a clear, easy to understand language.
• Principle 3- Choice and Consent: The purpose for collection of any personally 
identifying data shall be shall be made clear to Data Subject and their (implicit / explicit) 
approval shall be obtained regarding collection, use and/or disclosure of personal data 
before collection.
• Principle 4- Limiting Data Collection: Collection of any personal data shall be limited 
to minimum data that enables fulﬁllment of purposes provided for in Privacy Notice.
• Principle 5- Use, Retention and Destruction: Personal data usage shall be restricted 
to purposes provided for in Privacy Notice, which the Data Subject has implicitly or 
explicitly approved. Moreover, Data shall be retained as long as necessary to achieve 
their intended purposes or as required by laws and regulations. Furthermore, data shall 
be destroyed it in a safe manner that prevents leakage, loss, theft, misuse or 
unauthorized access.
• Principle 6- Access to Data: Entities shall provide a means by which any Data Subject 
can review, update and correct their personal data.
• Principle 7- Data Disclosure Limitation: Disclosure of personal data to third parties 
shall be restricted to the purposes provided for in Privacy Notice, which was approved 
by Data Subject.
• Principle 8- Data Security: Personal data shall be protected from leakage, damage, 
loss, theft, misuse, modiﬁcation, or unauthorized access – according to the controls 
issued by the National Cybersecurity Authority and the relevant authorities.
• Principle 9- Data Quality: Personal data shall be maintained after veriﬁcation of its 
accuracy, completeness and timeliness, and such data shall be directly relevant to 
purposes provided for in Privacy Notice.
• Principle 10- Monitoring and Compliance: Compliance with Data Controller's privacy 
policies and procedures shall be monitored, and any privacy-related inquires, 
complaints, and disputes shall be addressed.
Telehealth Application Guidelines
66
Minimum requirements of: 
• Medico-Legal:
◦ Being aware of legislation, professional, and regulatory and licensing requirements that 
inﬂuence the delivery of educational information.
◦ In organizations providing educational information, there should be senior management 
accountability for such information, including the supervision of all persons directly 
responsible for developing, coordinating, and operating Tele-education services.
◦ Organizations providing Tele-education services must have policies and procedures in 
place to protect the data and conﬁdentiality of information. Tele-education security 
policy and procedures should be integrated with those for electronic health records, 
whenever possible.
◦ There should be policies and procedures for documentation, storage and retrieval of 
patient records that respect the conﬁdentiality of the information.
◦ Tele-education consultation should not be anonymous: both patient and the healthcare 
professional need to know each other’s identity (61).
◦ Healthcare professional should obtain informed consent, which may be implied or 
expressed before starting any service or intervention following principles and 
processes similar to standard practice for the particular healthcare service.
◦ Explicit consent should be obtained from the patient for medical acts that would 
normally require explicit consent in the traditional health care setting (e.g. video or 
audio recording of the sessions, use of data for research or educational purposes) (62).
◦ Healthcare professional should share relevant information with the patient and 
caregiver, as appropriate, before the beginning of any Tele-education interaction. This 
information includes informing the patient of the objective of the Tele-education 
interaction, the role and responsibility of the provider and the patient during the 
Tele-education interaction, other people participating in this interaction.
Appendix B:
Telehealth Application Guidelines
67
ﻧﻤﻮﺫﺝ ﻣﻮﺍﻓﻘﺔ ﺍﻟﻤTelehalth Patient Consent Form
ﺃﻧﺎ )ﺍﻻﺳﻢ( ........................................ ﺃﻭﺍﻓﻖ ﻋﻠﻰ ﺗﻠﻘﻲ ﺧﺪﻣﺔ
ﻃ
ﻣﻤﻜﻦ ﺃﻥ ﻳﻜﻮﻥ ﻣﺘﻮﺍﺟﺪ ﻓﻲ ﻣﻨﺸﺄﺓ ﺻﺤﻴﺔ ﺃﺧﺮﻯ.
ﺧﺪﻣﺔ ﺍﻟﺮﻋﺎﻳﺔ ﺍﻟﺼﺤﻴﺔ ﻋﻦ ﺑﻌﺪ ﺗﻌﻨﻲ ﺑﺄﻥ
ﻓﻲ ﻣﻮﻗﻊ ﺑﻌﻴﺪ ﺳ
ﺍﻟﻤﻮﺍﻓﻘﺔ ﺻﺎﻟﺤﺔ ﻟﻤﺪﺓ ﺳﺘﺔ ﺃﺷﻬﺮ ﻟﻤﺘﺎﺑﻌﺔ ﺧﺪﻣﺎﺕ ﺍﻟﺮﻋﺎﻳﺔ ﺍﻟﺼﺤﻴﺔ ﻋﻦ ﺑﻌﺪ 
ﻣﻊ ﻣﻘﺪﻡ ﺍﻟﺮﻋﺎﻳﺔ ﺍﻟﺼﺤﻴﺔ.
ﻛﻤﺎ ﺃﻧﻨﻲ:
•ﺑﻤﻮﺟﺐ ﻫﺬﺍ ﺍﻭﺍﻓﻖ ﻋﻠﻰ ﺗﻠﻘﻲ ﺍﻟﺮﻋﺎﻳﺔ ﺍﻟﺼﺤﻴﺔ ﺑﺎﺳﺘﺨﺪﺍﻡ ﻣﻨﺼﺔ 
ﻣﻤﺎﺭﺳﺔ ﺍﻟﺮﻋﺎﻳﺔ ﺍﻟﺼﺤﻴﺔ ﻋﻦ ﺑﻌﺪ ﻟﺘﻘ
•ﻳﻤﻜﻨﻨﻲ ﺭﻓﺾ ﺗﻠﻘﻲ ﺍﻟﺮﻋﺎﻳﺔ ﺍﻟﺼﺤﻴﺔ ﻋﻦ ﺑﻌﺪ ﻓﻲ ﺃﻱ ﻭﻗﺖ ﺩﻭﻥ ﺍﻟﺘﺄ
ﻋﻠﻰ ﺣﻘﻲ ﻓﻲ ﺍﻟﺮﻋﺎﻳﺔ ﺃﻭ ﺍﻟﻌﻼﺝ ﺍﻟﻤﺴﺘﻘﺒﻠﻲ.
•ﺇﺫﺍ ﺭﻓﻀﺖ ﺗﻠﻘﻲ ﺍﻟﺮﻋﺎﻳﺔ ﺍﻟﺼﺤﻴﺔﻋﻦ ﺑﻌﺪ، ﻓﺈﻥ ﺍﻟﺨﻴﺎ
ﺍﻷﺧﺮﻯ ﺍﻟﻤﺘﺎﺣﺔ ﻟﻲ ﻫﻲ ﺗﻠﻘﻲ ﺍﻟﺨﺪﻣﺔ ﺍﻟﻄ
ﺍﻟﻤﻤﺎﺭﺱ ﺍﻟﺼﺤﻲ.
•ﺳﻴﺘﻢ ﺇﺑﻼﻏﻲ ﺑﺠﻤﻴﻊ ﺍﻻﺷﺨﺎﺹ ﺍﻟﺬ
ﺍﻟﺮﻋﺎﻳﺔ ﺍﻟﺼﺤﻴﺔ ﻋﻦ ﺑﻌﺪ ﺍﻟﺨﺎﺻﺔ ﺑﻲ.
•ﻣﻦ ﺍﻟﻤﻤﻜﻦ ﻣﻘﺎﺑﻠﺔ ﺍﻟﻤﻤﺎﺭﺱ ﺍﻟﺼﺢ ﻓﻮ
ﻋﻦ ﺑﻌﺪ ﺇﺫﺍ ﻇﻬﺮﺕ ﺣﺎﺟﺔ ﻣﺎﺳّﺔ ﺃﻭ ﺳﻴﺘﻢ ﺇﺧﺒﺎﺭﻱ ﻣﺴﺒﻘﺎً ﺇﻥ ﻛﺎﻥ ﺫﻟﻚ 
ﻏﻴﺮ ﻣﺘﻮﻓﺮ.
•ﺃﻭﺍﻓﻖ ﻋﻠﻰ ﺇﻧﻪ ﻳﻤﻜﻦ ﺍﻻﺣﺘﻔﺎﻅ ﺑﺴﺠﻼﺗﻲ ﺍﻟﻄ
ﺍﻟﺮﻋﺎﻳﺔ ﺍﻟﺼﺤﻴﺔ ﻋﻦ ﺑﻌﺪ ، ﻛﻲ ﻳﺘﻢ ﻋﻤﻞ ﺍﻟﻤ
ﻭﺍﻟﺘﻮﺛﻴﻖ، ﻭﺳﻴﺘﻢ ﺍﻻﺣﺘﻔﺎﻅ ﺑﻤﻌﻠﻮﻣﺎ
•ﺳﺄ
ﺧﺪﻣﺔ ﺍﻟﺮﻋﺎﻳﺔ ﺍﻟﺼﺤﻴﺔ ﻋﻦ ﺑﻌﺪ ﻛﻤﺎ ﻳﻨﺺ ﻋﻠﻴﻬﺎ ﺍﻟﻘﺎﻧﻮﻥ.
•ﻻﻳﻤﻜﻦ ﻧﺸﺮ ﺍﻟﻤﻌﻠﻮﻣﺎﺕ ﻣﻦ ﺧﺪﻣﺔ ﺍﻟﺮﻋﺎﻳﺔ ﺍﻟﺼﺤﻴﺔ ﻋﻦ ﺑﻌﺪ ﻟﻠﺒﺎﺣﺜﻴﻦ ﺃﻭ 
ﺃﻱ ﺷﺨﺺ ﺁﺧﺮ ﺩﻭﻥ ﻣﻮﺍﻓﻘﺘﻲ ﺍﻟﺨﻄﻴﺔ ﺍﻹﺿﺎﻓﻴﺔ.
•ﺃﻓﻬﻢ ﺃﻥ ﺍﻟﻤﺸﺎﻛﻞ ﺍﻟﺘﻘﻨﻴﺔ ﻗﺪ ﺗﺤﺪﺙ ﻗﺒﻞ ﺟﻠﺴﺎﺕ ﺍﻟﺮﻋﺎﻳﺔ ﺍﻟﺼﺤﻴﺔ ﻋﻦ 
ﺑﻌﺪ ﺃﻭ ﺃ
•ﺃﻗﺒﻞ ﺃﻥ ﺍﻟﻤﻤﺎﺭﺳﻴﻦ ﺍﻟﺼﺤ
ﺗﻔﺎﻋﻠﻴﺔ ﻣﻊ ﻣﻜﺎﻟﻤﺔ ﻓﻴﺪ
ﺇﺟ
ﺍﻟﺘﻘﻨﻴﺔ ﻣﺜﻞ ﺳﺮﻋﺔ ﺍﻹ
I (name)....................................................................
agree to receive a Telehealth service. I understand that 
healthcare practitioner(name)................................
my be located in another facility.
A Telehealth service means that my visit with a 
practitioner at the
distant site will happen by using special audiovisual 
equipment.
This consent is valid for six months for follow-up 
Telehealth
services with the healthcare provider.
I also understand that:
• I hereby authorize healthcare services to use the 
telehealth practice platform for telecommunication 
for evaluating, testing and diagnosing my medical 
condition.
• I can decline the Telehealth service at any time 
without affecting my right to future care or 
treatment.
• If I decline the Telehealth services, the other 
options/alternatives available for me is in-person 
services.
• I will be informed of all people who will be present 
during myTelehealth service.
• I may see an employee in-person immediately after 
the
• Telehealth service if an urgent need arises OR I will 
be told ahead of time that this is not available.
• I agree that my medical records on telehealth can be 
kept for
• further evaluation, analysis and documentation, and 
in all of these, my information will be kept private.
• I will have access to all medical information resulting 
from the Telehealth service as provided by law.
• The information from the Telehealth service (images 
that can be identiﬁed as mine or other medical 
information from the Telehealth service) cannot be 
released to researchers or anyone else without my 
additional written consent.
• I understand that technical difﬁculties may occur 
before or during the telehealth sessions and my 
encounter might not go as intended.
• I accept that the professionals can contact interactive 
sessions with video call via robots; however, I am 
informed that the sessions can be conducted via 
regular voice communication if the technical 
requirements such as internet speed cannot be met.
ﺍﺳﻢ ﺍﻟﻤ
:Patient`s Name
:ﺍﻟﺠﻨﺲ
ﺗﺎ
Date Of Birth:
:ﺍﻟﺘﻮﻗﻴﻊ
Signature:
:ﺭﻗﻢ ﺍﻟﺴﺠﻞ ﺍﻟﻄﺒﻲ
Medical Record Number:
:ﺍﺳﻢ ﺍﻟﻤﻨﺸﺄﺓ ﺍﻟﺼﺤﻴﺔ
Healthcare Facility Name:
:ﺍﻟﻮﻗﺖ
Time:
:ﺍﻟﺘﺎ
Date:
ﺃ
ﺫﻛﺮ
:ﺍﻟﻴﻮﻡ
Day:

• Setup:
◦ Platform and sessions for patient education should fulﬁl the required privacy and 
conﬁdentially measures in the kingdom.
• Patient experience and patient rights:
◦ Education material provided should be created and reviewed by subject matter experts 
in the ﬁeld of the content provided and documenting the approving body.
◦ Education material should be maintained up to date and each content should have an 
expiry date when it is going to be subject for review.
◦ The evaluation parameters for the educational content are as follows: patient outcomes 
and satisfactions, provider satisfaction, quality of illustration content, clarity of the 
content and consumer completion of the content
◦ HCPs ethical conduct should not be compromised in all telehealth educational 
sessions. 
◦ Patients’ rights and conﬁdentiality should strictly preserved in all telehealth educational 
sessions.
• Technical:
◦ Technical requirements must be appropriate and ﬁt for purpose to eﬀectively transfer 
audio and visual data in real time and any interactions between the Provider-end and 
the Receiver-end during the tele-educational session. 
◦ Software and hardware capability and suitability for the use of a tele-education setting 
for diﬀerent purposes and scenarios may require a compatibility between the software 
and the diﬀerent hardware tools such as computers, smartphones, laptops, tablets.  
◦ Adopt a process of continuous monitoring and testing the used tele-education 
solutions, networks and devices in a frequency that prevent any failures during the 
real-time session and proactively discover and provide the support for any 
troubleshooting required instantly.
1. US Department of Health and Human Services HR and SAO for the A of T. 2001 
Telemedicine Report to Congress. 
2. Shaw DK. Overview of Telehealth and Its Application to Cardiopulmonary Physical 
Therapy. Cardiopulmonary Physical Therapy Journal [Internet]. 2009 Jun [cited 2022 Mar 
22];13:(2)20. Available from: /pmc/articles/PMC2845264/
3. Mashima PA, Doarn CR. Overview of telehealth activities in speech-language 
pathology. Telemedicine journal and e-health : the oﬃcial journal of the American 
Telemedicine Association [Internet]. 2008 Dec 1 [cited 2022 Mar 22];17–1101:(10)14. 
Available from: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/19119834/
4. Miller EA. Solving the disjuncture between research and practice: Telehealth trends in 
the 21st century. Health Policy. 2007 Jul 41–133:(2)82;1. 
5. Medical Association A. 50-state survey: Establishment of a patient-physician 
relationship via telemedicine. 2018; 
6. Saudi Guidelines for Informed Consent. 
7. kkondo. Tool 3 Patient identiﬁcation and matching to intended care. 
8. Colorado Proposes New Telehealth Rules | Blogs | Health Care Law Today | Foley & 
Lardner LLP [Internet]. [cited 2022 Mar 22]. Available from: 
https://www.foley.com/en/insights/publications/07/2015/colorado-proposes-new-telehea
lth-rules
9. The Guidelines provide practical advice on how to conduct telehealth consultations. 
[cited 2022 Mar 22]; Available from: www.racptelehealth.com.au
10. Regulatory-approaches-to-telemedicine. 
11. The Royal Australasian College of Physicians Ethical Guidelines for Occupational and 
Environmental Physicians. 2016; 
12. The Guidelines provide practical advice on how to conduct telehealth consultations 
[Internet]. Available from: www.racptelehealth.com.au
13. Haleem A, Javaid M, Singh RP , Suman R. Telemedicine for healthcare: Capabilities, 
features, barriers, and applications. Sensors International. 2021 Jan 2:100117 ;1. 
14. Privacy and Data Protection in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia [Internet]. [cited 2022  
Mar 22]. Available from: https://www.my.gov.sa/wps/portal/snp/content/dataprotection
15. BOARD OF GOVERNORS In supersession of the Medical Council of India 
Telemedicine Practice Guidelines Enabling Registered Medical Practitioners to Provide 
Healthcare Using Telemedicine. 2020; 
References
Telehealth Application Guidelines
68
:ﺍﻟﻴﻮﻡ
Day:
Cross-border access:
Deﬁnition:
Cross-border tele-health is the provision of healthcare services involves medical 
practice and information and communications technology. Cross border tele-health 
allows healthcare to be provided at distance, opening the door for healthcare services 
to be provided by a health professional who lives in a country other than the patient’s 
(63).
Description:
• When a patient is requesting a consultation from a healthcare professional who is 
located outside Saudi Arabia, whether using a synchronous (video consultation, 
tele-triaging, tele-education, tele-management, RPM) or asynchronous, 
store-and-forward (tele-expertise, tele-education)
• When a HCP requesting a service from another HCP who is located outside Saudi 
Arabia and vice versa, whether using a synchronous (tele-assistance, 
tele-management, tele-surgery, tele-education) or asynchronous, 
store-and-forward (tele-expertise, tele-diagnosis).
• The use of telehealth technical solutions and emerging technologies such as 
artiﬁcial intelligence (augmentation in screening) located in diﬀerent countries. 
Patient Rights And Ethics - PubMed [Internet]. [cited 2022 Mar 22]. Available from: 
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30855863/
17. The Regulation and Licensing of Telemedicine in Saudi Arabia - Al Tamimi & 
Company [Internet]. [cited 2022 Mar 22]. Available from: 
https://www.tamimi.com/law-update-articles/the-regulation-and-licensing-of-telemedicin
e-in-saudi-arabia/
18. Saudi S, SaudiMOH M, wwwmohgovsa Mohp. Clinical Governance 
Directorate-DHCOE Legal Regulations for Telehealth Services. [cited 2022 Mar 22]; 
Available from: www.moh.gov.sa
19. Alkhenizan AH, Shaﬁq MR. The process of litigation for medical errors in Saudi Arabia 
and the United Kingdom. Saudi Medical Journal [Internet]. 2018 Nov 1  [cited 2022 Mar 
26];1075:(11)39. Available from: /pmc/articles/PMC6274669/
20. Amirthalingam K. Medical dispute resolution, patient safety and the doctor-patient 
relationship. Singapore Medical Journal [Internet]. 2017 Dec 1 [cited 2022 Mar 
26];681:(12)58. Available from: /pmc/articles/PMC5917052/
21. Curran WJ. The Patient’s Bill of Rights Becomes Law. 
http://dx.doi.org/101056/NEJM197401032900108 [Internet]. 2010 Jan 13 [cited 2022 Mar 
26];3–32:(1)290. Available from: 
https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJM197401032900108
22. Patient Rights And Ethics - PubMed [Internet]. [cited 2022 Mar 26]. Available from: 
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30855863/
23. Nasser M. Medical dispute in Indonesia health. Legal and Forensic Medicine. 2013  
Jan 70–1459;1. 
24. The governing rules of Telehealth in the kingdom of Saudi Arabia-Executive rules. 
25. Creating a Continuum of Care. 
26. Dingley C, Daugherty K, Derieg MK, Persing R. Improving Patient Safety Through 
Provider Communication Strategy Enhancements. Advances in Patient Safety: New 
Directions and Alternative Approaches (Vol 3: Performance and Tools) [Internet]. 2008 
[cited 2022 Mar 22]; Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK43663/
27. Henriksen K, Battles JB, Keyes MA, Mary Grady ML. Advances in Patient Safety: 
New Directions and Alternative Approaches Volume 4. Technology and Medication Safety 
Editors. 2008; 
28. Lee Ventola C. Mobile Devices and Apps for Health Care Professionals: Uses and 
Beneﬁts. Pharmacy and Therapeutics [Internet]. 2014 [cited 2022 Mar 22];356 :(5)39. 
Available from: /pmc/articles/PMC4029126/
29. DOH STANDARD ON TELE-MEDICINE. 2020. 
30. National Data Management Oﬃce Data Management and Personal Data Protection 
Standards. 2021; 
Telehealth Application Guidelines
69
National E-Health and Data Management Strategy Draft for Stakeholder Consultation 
Qatar National E-Health & Data Program (QNeDP) National E-Health and Data 
Management Strategy i Revision Log. 2015; 
32. Healthcare Data Management: Three Principles of Using Data to Its Ful… [Internet]. 
[cited 2022 Mar 22]. Available from: 
https://www.slideshare.net/healthcatalyst1/healthcare-data-management-three-principle
s-of-using-data-to-its-full-potential
33. What is Cloud Computing? | Oracle Saudi Arabia [Internet]. [cited 2022 Mar 22]. 
Available from: https://www.oracle.com/sa/cloud/what-is-cloud-computing/
34. Three reasons why healthcare is moving to the cloud - Blog | Philips [Internet]. [cited 
2022 Mar 22]. Available from: 
https://www.philips.com/a-w/about/news/archive/blogs/innovation-matters/202108/2021
03-three-reasons-why-healthcare-providers-are-moving-to-the-cloud.html
35. Adane K, Gizachew M, Kendie S. The role of medical data in eﬃcient patient care 
delivery: a review. Risk Management and Healthcare Policy [Internet]. 2019 [cited 2022 
Mar 22];12:67. Available from: /pmc/articles/PMC6486797/
36. The Need for a National Digital Identity Infrastructure - Centre for International 
Governance Innovation [Internet]. [cited 2022 Mar 22]. Available from: 
https://www.cigionline.org/articles/need-national-digital-identity-infrastructure/?utm_sour
ce=google_ads&utm_medium=grant&gclid=CjwKCAiAiKuOBhBQEiwAId_sK3KibX9kSEQ
yvvjX4i6sJPN-IfCzv2UQAkHT5XWwZxTHWI1TCjqfnxoCAc8QAvD_BwE
37. Data Management Best Practices for Hospitals and Medical Facilities [Internet]. [cited 
2022 Mar 22]. Available from: 
https://www.hhmglobal.com/knowledge-bank/articles/data-management-best-practices-
for-hospitals-and-medical-facilities
38. Sani N, Manohar RK, Okocha DO, Bdamasi S. Health Information Systems, Best 
Practices in Patient data Management for Eﬀective Health Care Service Delivery in 
Hospitals. A case of Some Selected Tertiary Hospitals in Jigawa State of Nigeria. 
39. Data Collection and Quality Assurance - Registries for Evaluating Patient Outcomes - 
NCBI Bookshelf [Internet]. [cited 2022 Mar 22]. Available from: 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK208601/
40. Interoperability in Healthcare | HIMSS [Internet]. [cited 2022 Mar 22]. Available from: 
https://www.himss.org/resources/interoperability-healthcare
41. Global strategy on digital health 2021 .2025-2020 [cited 2022 Mar 22]; Available from: 
http://apps.who.int/bookorders.
42.What Is Patient Experience? | Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality [Internet]. 
[cited 2022 Mar 22]. Available from: 
https://www.ahrq.gov/cahps/about-cahps/patient-experience/index.html
43. Health Databases and Health Database Organizations: Uses, Beneﬁts, and Concerns 
- Health Data in the Information Age - NCBI Bookshelf [Internet]. [cited 2022 Mar 22]. 
Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK236556/
Telehealth Application Guidelines
70
National E-Health and Data Management Strategy Draft for Stakeholder Consultation 
Qatar National E-Health & Data Program (QNeDP) National E-Health and Data 
Management Strategy i Revision Log. 2015; 
32. Healthcare Data Management: Three Principles of Using Data to Its Ful… [Internet]. 
[cited 2022 Mar 22]. Available from: 
https://www.slideshare.net/healthcatalyst1/healthcare-data-management-three-principle
s-of-using-data-to-its-full-potential
33. What is Cloud Computing? | Oracle Saudi Arabia [Internet]. [cited 2022 Mar 22]. 
Available from: https://www.oracle.com/sa/cloud/what-is-cloud-computing/
34. Three reasons why healthcare is moving to the cloud - Blog | Philips [Internet]. [cited 
2022 Mar 22]. Available from: 
https://www.philips.com/a-w/about/news/archive/blogs/innovation-matters/202108/2021
03-three-reasons-why-healthcare-providers-are-moving-to-the-cloud.html
35. Adane K, Gizachew M, Kendie S. The role of medical data in eﬃcient patient care 
delivery: a review. Risk Management and Healthcare Policy [Internet]. 2019 [cited 2022 
Mar 22];12:67. Available from: /pmc/articles/PMC6486797/
36. The Need for a National Digital Identity Infrastructure - Centre for International 
Governance Innovation [Internet]. [cited 2022 Mar 22]. Available from: 
https://www.cigionline.org/articles/need-national-digital-identity-infrastructure/?utm_sour
ce=google_ads&utm_medium=grant&gclid=CjwKCAiAiKuOBhBQEiwAId_sK3KibX9kSEQ
yvvjX4i6sJPN-IfCzv2UQAkHT5XWwZxTHWI1TCjqfnxoCAc8QAvD_BwE
37. Data Management Best Practices for Hospitals and Medical Facilities [Internet]. 
[cited 2022 Mar 22]. Available from: 
https://www.hhmglobal.com/knowledge-bank/articles/data-management-best-practices-
for-hospitals-and-medical-facilities
38. Sani N, Manohar RK, Okocha DO, Bdamasi S. Health Information Systems, Best 
Practices in Patient data Management for Eﬀective Health Care Service Delivery in 
Hospitals. A case of Some Selected Tertiary Hospitals in Jigawa State of Nigeria. 
39. Data Collection and Quality Assurance - Registries for Evaluating Patient Outcomes - 
NCBI Bookshelf [Internet]. [cited 2022 Mar 22]. Available from: 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK208601/
40. Interoperability in Healthcare | HIMSS [Internet]. [cited 2022 Mar 22]. Available from: 
https://www.himss.org/resources/interoperability-healthcare
41. Global strategy on digital health 2021 .2025-2020 [cited 2022 Mar 22]; Available 
from: http://apps.who.int/bookorders.
42.What Is Patient Experience? | Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality [Internet]. 
[cited 2022 Mar 22]. Available from: 
https://www.ahrq.gov/cahps/about-cahps/patient-experience/index.html
43. Health Databases and Health Database Organizations: Uses, Beneﬁts, and Concerns 
- Health Data in the Information Age - NCBI Bookshelf [Internet]. [cited 2022 Mar 22]. 
Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK236556/
Telehealth Application Guidelines
71
• Legal:
◦ In tortious claims jurisdiction is decided on the basis of the place where harm 
occurred as a result of the tort (that is to say, a result of a negligent act or failure to 
act). The applicable law will normally be the law of the jurisdiction in which the tort 
was committed.
◦ The healthcare facility shall ensure malpractice insurance for healthcare professionals 
is in place throughout the duration of the telehealth service.
◦ Healthcare professionals shall be responsible based on their individual contribution. 
◦ The physicians have the right to refuse a case if the quality and the quantity of the 
data provided in the patient record are not suﬃcient to give a complete and accurate 
medical opinion or if the quality of the images is insuﬃcient.
◦ The patient has to give informed consent for the exchange of his patient ﬁle and 
medical data.
◦ Patient consent should cover the possibility of having a HCP present outside Saudi 
Arabia.
◦ Patients are entitled to a written or electronic medical record of their treatment, and 
access to at least a copy of this record.
◦ The local healthcare facility involved in cross-border telehealth activities should 
guarantee that there is no abuse, malpractice nor ethical issues during cross-border 
telehealth practice.
◦ The local healthcare facility involved in cross-border telehealth activities should have 
a bounding agreement that hold both parties committed and accountable to the 
national requirements and regulations in a constant manner.
◦ A translator should be present in case of language barrier to avoid misinterpretations 
during the consultation session between the HCP and the patient. 
44,10 Ways to Secure Healthcare Data - Fast Chart [Internet]. [cited 2022 Mar 22]. 
Available from: https://fastchart.com/news/ways-to-secure-healthcare-data/
45.Delivering quality health services. [cited 2022 Mar 22]; Available from: 
http://apps.who.int/bookorders.
46. Telemedicine Regulations in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. 
47. The governing rules of Telehealth in the kingdom of Saudi Arabia-Executive rules. 
48. What is Teleradiology? A Deﬁnition of Services & History - eVisit [Internet]. [cited 
2022 Mar 22]. Available from: https://evisit.com/resources/what-is-teleradiology/
49. Vegesna A, Tran M, Angelaccio M, Arcona S. Remote Patient Monitoring via 
Non-Invasive Digital Technologies: A Systematic Review. Telemedicine journal and 
e-health : the oﬃcial journal of the American Telemedicine Association [Internet]. 2017 
Jan 1 [cited 2022 Mar 22];17–3:(1)23. Available from: 
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27116181/
50. Continuous Glucose Monitoring | NIDDK [Internet]. [cited 2022 Mar 22]. Available 
from: 
https://www.niddk.nih.gov/health-information/diabetes/overview/managing-diabetes/co
ntinuous-glucose-monitoring
51. Guidelines For TeleICU Operations. DRAFT FOR OPEN PUBLIC COMMENTS March 
2014 ,28 April 26, PDF Free Download [Internet]. [cited 2022 Mar 22]. Available from: 
https://docplayer.net/12300089-Guidelines-for-teleicu-operations-draft-for-open-public-
comments-march-2014-28-april-2014-26.html
52. Demaerschalk BM, Berg J, Chong BW, Gross H, Nystrom K, Adeoye O, et al. 
American Telemedicine Association: Telestroke Guidelines. Telemedicine journal and 
e-health : the oﬃcial journal of the American Telemedicine Association [Internet]. 2017 
May 1 [cited 2022 Mar 22];8–376:(5)23. Available from: 
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28384077/
53. Akay Metin, editor. Wiley Encyclopedia of Biomedical Engineering, 6 Volume Set | 
Wiley [Internet]. 2006 [cited 2022 Mar 22]. 4152 p. Available from: 
https://www.wiley.com/en-us/Wiley+Encyclopedia+of+Biomedical+Engineering%2C+6+
Volume+Set-p-9780471249672
54. Robotic Telesurgery - Beneﬁts, And Challenges | RoboticsBiz [Internet]. [cited 2022 
Mar 22]. Available from: 
https://roboticsbiz.com/robotic-telesurgery-beneﬁts-and-challenges/
55. Kumar S, Marescaux J. Telesurgery. Telesurgery. 190–1;2008. 
56Challacombe B, Kavoussi L, Patriciu A, Stoianovici D, Dasgupta P . Technology 
Insight: telementoring and telesurgery in urology. Nature Clinical Practice Urology 
[Internet]. 2006 Nov 1 [cited 2022 Mar 22];8–611:(11)3. Available from: 
https://go.gale.com/ps/i.do?p=AONE&sw=w&issn=17434270&v=2.1&it=r&id=GALE%7
CA183392797&sid=googleScholar&linkaccess=fulltext
57. SM S, C A, S V, A P . Telesurgery and Robotic Surgery: Ethical and Legal Aspect. 
Journal of Community Medicine & Health Education 5:3 2015 [Internet]. 2015 Jul 7 [cited 
2022 Mar 
Telehealth Application Guidelines
72
2–1:(3)5;[22. Available from: 
https://www.omicsonline.org/open-access/telesurgery-and-robotic-surgery-ethical-and-l
egal-aspect-1000355-0214-2376.php?aid=54752
58. Telecommunications [Internet]. [cited 2022 Mar 22]. Available from: 
https://www.umsl.edu/~joshik/msis480/chapt07.htm
59. Bishoﬀ JT, Kavoussi LR. Atlas of laparoscopic and robotic urologic surgery. :356. 
60. Masic I. E-Learning as New Method of Medical Education. Acta Informatica Medica 
[Internet]. 2008 [cited 2022 Mar 22];102:(2)16. Available from: 
/pmc/articles/PMC3789161/
61. BOARD OF GOVERNORS In supersession of the Medical Council of India 
Telemedicine Practice Guidelines Enabling Registered Medical Practitioners to Provide 
Healthcare Using Telemedicine. 2020; 
62.Using Video in Research [Internet]. [cited 2022 Mar 22]. Available from: 
http://www.sfu.ca/media-lab/cmns362/Spotlight45.pdf
63. International Telemedicine: A Global Regulatory Challenge - Lexology [Internet]. [cited 
2022 Mar 22]. Available from: 
https://www.lexology.com/library/detail.aspx?g=f2d9946b-e5c43-3f5-b9528-813e23afbd
a
64. Portnoy JM, Pandya A, Waller M, Elliott T. Telemedicine and emerging technologies 
for health care in allergy/immunology. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology. 2020 
Feb 54–445:(2)145;1. 
Telehealth Application Guidelines
73
Minimum requirements of: 
• Medico-Legal:
◦ All novel technologies should be registered either the SFDA or any other medical 
devices registration authorities.
◦ Healthcare professionals should obtain informed consent from the patient for the use of 
these emerging technologies.
• Setup:
◦ The Healthcare facilities must apply their safety procedures and protocols to 
Telemedicine services, when using all novel technologies.
• Technical:
◦ The novel technology use should be secured by design.
◦ Privacy and conﬁdentiality measures should be maintained.
• Personnel:
◦ Healthcare professionals providing Telemedicine services using novel technologies 
should have the necessary education, training/orientation and ongoing professional 
development needed for the safe provision of quality health services.
◦ Each healthcare facility should be aware of best practices relating to Telemedicine and 
adapt and change processes as such practices evolve. 
• Patient experience and patient rights:
◦ Some evaluation parameters may include patient outcomes and satisfaction, provider 
satisfaction; technical quality of service; quality of communication; performance 
metrics; costs; utilization; and improved access to care.  
◦ HCPs ethical conduct should not be compromised in the use of any of the novel 
telehealth solutions. 
◦ Patients’ rights, privacy and conﬁdentiality should strictly preserved in all novel 
telehealth solutions.
Telehealth Application Guidelines
Telehealth Application Guidelines
                          2023