AI Ethics Principles
September 2023
Version 1.0

Table of Contents
..............................................................................................................................................Introduction
.................................................................................................................................................Deﬁnitions
3
5
...........................................................................................................................................................
................................................................................................................................
.............................................................................................................................
...........................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................
................................................................................
.........................................................................................................
....................................................................................
..................................................................................
.................................................................................................................
...........................................................................................................................................
......................................................................................................................................................
.....................................................................................................................................
............................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................................................
....................................................................................................................................................
.............................................................................................................................
...............................................................................................................
.............................................
.......................................................................................................
..........................................................................................................
Scope 8
AI System Lifecycle 9
.......................................................................................................................................................AI Risks 8
AI Ethics Principles and Controls 11
Roles and Responsibilities 28
Adopting Entities 30
Optional Registration 32
Compliance 32
Motivational Badges 32
Annexure 33
Annexure A: AI Ethics Tools 34
Annexure B: AI Ethics Tools Mapping to AI System Lifecycle 40
Annexure C: AI Ethics Checklist 41
Principle 1 – Fairness 12
Principle 2 – Privacy & Security 15
National Level 29
SDAIA 29
Principle 3 – Humanity 17
Principle 4 – Social & Environmental Beneﬁts 19
Principle 5 – Reliability & Safety 21
Principle 6 – Transparency & Explainability 23
Principle 7 – Accountability & Responsibility 25
2
AI Ethics Principles
Due to the fast growth of practices and technologies around Artificial Intelligence (AI), the 
use of AI has expanded to several industries such as health, education, entertainment, etc. 
AI helps make entities decision-making processes more efficient, accurate and faster by 
predicting future patterns. AI can be used to analyze data, including big data, by developing 
and operating systems with advanced models and algorithms that help improve the quality 
of processes. Due to the increasing interest in these technologies, many entities in both the 
public and private sectors, in addition to non-profit entities, have developed digital solutions 
based on AI to address existing challenges using creative and innovative methods, thus 
making the role of AI more essential to maintain the competitive capabilities of these entities.
Introduction
3
AI Ethics Principles

In accordance with KSA's commitment to human rights and its cultural values, as well as 
aligning to international standards and recommendations on the ethics of Artificial Intelligence 
and with reference to the Council of Ministers’ Resolution No. (292) dated 27/04/1441  AH., 
stating in Paragraph (1) of Article 10 that SDAIA is mandated to develop policies, governance 
mechanisms, standards, and controls related to data and artificial intelligence and monitor 
compliance therewith upon issuance, SDAIA has analyzed global practices and standards to 
develop this AI Ethics Framework which aims to:
Support the Kingdom’s efforts towards 
achieving its vision and national 
strategies related to adopting AI 
technology, encouraging research and 
innovation, and driving economic 
growth for prosperity and development.
Develop and establish AI ethics 
policies, guidelines, regulations, and 
frameworks.
Govern data and AI models to limit the 
negative implications of AI systems 
(economically, psychologically, 
socially, etc.) and potential threats 
(security, political, etc.).
Help entities adopt standards and 
ethics when building and developing 
AI-based solutions to ensure 
responsible use thereof.
Protect the privacy of data subjects 
and their rights with respect to the 
collection and processing of their data.
4
AI Ethics Principles
Deﬁnitions

6
AI Ethics Principles
For the purposes of this document, the following words and phrases, wherever mentioned 
herein, shall have meanings ascribed thereto, unless the context requires otherwise:
Any public entity, business, or individual 
that is required to comply with the present 
document. 
Adopting Entity
The cyclical process that AI projects are 
expected follow to be able to design, build, 
and produce a robust and safe system that 
delivers business value and insights through 
adhering to a standard and structured way
of managing AI model delivery and 
implementation.
AI System Lifecycle
Any natural or legal person that applies or uses 
AI systems to achieve certain goals.
AI System Owner
An individual that is permitted, appropriately 
cleared, and has a requirement to access an 
information system to perform or assist an 
established and preset role or responsibility 
on the system’s functionalities and 
components.
Authorized User
The Chief Data Officer (CDO) is responsible 
for the development and execution of the 
Data Management & Data Governance and 
oversee the implementation practices across 
the Public Entities. 
CDO 
A set of values, principles, and techniques to 
guide moral conduct in developing and using 
AI technologies.  
AI Ethics
Artiﬁcial intelligence or AI is a collection of 
technologies that can enable a machine 
or system to sense, comprehend, act, 
and learn.
Artiﬁcial Intelligence
A set of predictive models and advanced 
algorithms that can be used to analyze data 
and predict the future or facilitate decision 
-making for projected future events.
AI System
Any natural or legal person that audits AI 
systems to achieve certain goals.
AI System Assessor
Any natural or legal person that develops AI 
systems by building predictive models using 
data and algorithms to achieve certain goals.
AI System Developer
7
AI Ethics Principles
Every data – of whatever source or form – that 
would lead to the identification of the individual 
specifically, or make it possible to identify him 
directly or indirectly, including: name, personal 
identification number, addresses, contact 
numbers, license numbers, records, personal 
property, bank account and credit card 
numbers, fixed or removing pictures of the 
individual, and other data of personal nature. 
Personal Data
Saudi Data and Artiﬁcial Intelligence Authority
SDAIA
How accurately a method measures what it 
is intended to measure.
Validity (Accuracy)
Data Sample
An individual to whom the personal data 
belongs, his representative, or whoever has 
legal guardianship over him.
Data Subject
Any natural or legal person that consumes or 
makes use of the goods or services produced 
by AI systems.
End-User
Any independent governmental or public 
entity assuming regulatory duties and 
responsibilities for a specific sector in the 
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia under a legal 
instrument.
National Regulatory Authority
A collection of facts in a raw or unorganized 
form such as numbers, characters, images, 
video, voice recordings, or symbols.
Data
Data  governance  is the process of managing 
the availability, usability, integrity, and security 
of data in organizations and systems, based 
on data standards and policies that also 
control data usage. 
Data Governance
The   data    used   to   build, train  and   test   predictive 
models and AI algorithms to reach specific 
results. 
The property of intended consistency in 
behavior and results.
Reliability
Personal data that indicates or includes 
a reference to a person’s ethnic or tribal 
origin; religious, intellectual or political 
beliefs; membership of civil associations 
or institutions; criminal and security data; 
biometric identifying data; genetic data; 
credit data; health data; location data; and 
data that indicates that one or both of an 
individual’s parents are unknown.
Sensitive Data
Scope
This AI Ethics Framework shall apply to all AI stakeholders designing, developing, deploying, 
implementing, using, or being affected by AI systems within KSA, including but not limited to 
public entities, private entities, non-profit entities, researchers, public services, institutions, civil 
society organizations, individuals, workers, and consumers.
Risk management should be directly interlinked into AI initiatives, so that oversight is concurrent 
with internal development of AI technology. Risk management of AI systems aﬀects a wide 
range of risk types including data, algorithm, compliance, operational, legal, reputational, and 
regulatory risks. Risk management subcomponents, such as model interpretability, bias 
detection, performance monitoring, are built in so that oversight is constant and consistent with 
AI development activities. In this approach, standards, testing, and controls are embedded into 
various stages of the AI System Lifecycle, from design to development and post-deployment.
AI Risks
The categories and levels of risks associated with the development and/or use of artificial 
intelligence are classified into the following:
Little or no risk: There are no restrictions on AI systems that pose little or no risk such as 
spam ﬁlters, but it is recommended that these systems be ethically compliant. 
Limited risk: AI systems that pose limited risks, such as technical programs related to 
function, development, and performance, are subject to the application of the AI ethics 
principles mentioned in this document.
High risk: AI systems that pose “high risks” to basic rights must undergo pre- and 
post-conformity assessments, and in addition to adhering to ethics, the relevant statutory 
requirements must be considered.
Unacceptable risk: AI systems that pose an “unacceptable risk” to people’s safety, 
livelihood, and rights such as those related to social profiling, exploitation of children, or 
distortion of behavior that are likely to occur are not allowed. 
8
AI Ethics Principles
AI System Lifecycle
The AI System Lifecycle is the cyclical process that AI projects follow. It defines each step that an 
organization is expected to follow to take advantage of AI to derive practical business value. It is 
a standard way of representing the tasks based on best practices in implementing and managing 
AI models which makes it a great candidate for embedding AI ethics. 
The AI System Lifecycle is split into four steps, all of which have equal importance, and the 
relevant activities are explained below.
01 02
0304
Plan and
Design
Prepare 
Input
Data
Build and
Validate
Deploy 
and
Monitor
Plan and Design: 
Deﬁne the problem
Support your problem with a data-driven approach
Select a framing approach on technology and system
which governs AI 
Conduct feasibility assessment for the selected approach 
Deﬁne KPIs
Prepare Input Data:
Gather data
Discover and assess data
Cleanse and validate data
Transform data into AI model input features
9
AI Ethics Principles
Build and Validate:
Train and test the model 
Tune the hyperparameters of the model
Validate model performance
Risk Evaluation
Deploy and Monitor:
Deploy the model to the AI system
Create versioning structure
Monitor the production model performance periodically 
Assess if there is a need to change the design according to results of periodic reviews
10
AI Ethics Principles
AI Ethics Principles
and Controls
Principle 1 – Fairness
Plan and Design: 
The fairness principle requires taking necessary actions to eliminate bias, discrimination 
or stigmatization of individuals, communities, or groups in the design, data, development, 
deployment and use of AI systems. Bias may occur due to data, representation or algorithms 
and could lead to discrimination against the historically disadvantaged groups.
 
When designing, selecting, and developing AI systems, it is essential to ensure just, fair, 
non-biased, non-discriminatory and objective standards that are inclusive, diverse, and 
representative of all or targeted segments of society. The functionality of an AI system should 
not be limited to a specific group based on gender, race, religion, disability, age, or sexual 
orientation. In addition, the potential risks, overall benefits, and purpose of utilizing sensitive 
personal data should be well-motivated and defined or articulated by the AI System Owner. 
To ensure consistent AI systems that are based on fairness and inclusiveness, AI systems should 
be trained on data that are cleansed from bias and is representative of affected minority groups. 
Al algorithms should be built and developed in a manner that makes their composition free from 
bias and correlation fallacy.
1- At the initial stages of setting out the purpose of the AI system, the design team shall 
collaborate to pinpoint the objectives and how to reach them in an efficient and optimized 
manner. Planning the design of the AI system is an essential stage to translate the system’s 
intended goals and outcomes. During this phase, it is important to implement a fairness-aware 
design that takes appropriate precautions across the AI system algorithm, processes, and 
mechanisms to prevent biases from having a discriminatory effect or lead to skewed and 
unwanted results or outcomes.
2- Fairness-aware design should start at the beginning of the AI System Lifecycle with a 
collaborative effort from technical and non-technical members to identify potential harm and 
benefits, affected individuals and vulnerable groups and evaluate how they are impacted by 
the results and whether the impact is justifiable given the general purpose of the AI system. 
12
AI Ethics Principles
3- A fairness assessment of the AI system is crucial, and the metrics should be selected at this 
stage of the AI System Lifecycle. The metrics should be chosen based on the algorithm type 
(rule-based, classification, regression, etc.), the effect of the decision (punitive, selective, etc.), 
and the harm and benefit on correctly and incorrectly predicted samples.
4- Sensitive personal data attributes relating to persons or groups which are systematically or 
historically disadvantaged should be identified and defined at this stage. The allowed threshold 
which makes the assessment fair or unfair should be defined. The fairness assessment metrics 
to be applied to sensitive features should be measured during future steps. 
Prepare Input Data: 
1- Following the best practice of responsible data acquisition, handling, classification, and 
management must be a priority to ensure that results and outcomes align with the AI system’s 
set goals and objectives. Effective data quality soundness and procurement begin by ensuring 
the integrity of the data source and data accuracy in representing all observations to avoid the 
systematic disadvantaging of under-represented or advantaging over-represented groups. The 
quantity and quality of the data sets should be sufficient and accurate to serve the purpose of 
the system. The sample size of the data collected or procured has a significant impact on the 
accuracy and fairness of the outputs of a trained model. 
2- Sensitive personal data attributes which are defined in the plan and design phase should 
not be included in the model data not to feed the existing bias on them. Also, the proxies of 
the sensitive features should be analyzed and not included in the input data. In some cases, 
this may not be possible due to the accuracy or objective of the AI system. In this case, the 
justification of the usage of the sensitive personal data attributes or their proxies should be 
provided. 
13
AI Ethics Principles
Build and Validate:
1- At the build and validate stage of the AI System Lifecycle, it is essential to take into 
consideration implementation fairness as a common theme when building, testing, and 
implementing the AI system. Model building and feature selection will require engineers and 
designers to be aware that the choices made about grouping or separating and including or 
excluding features as well as more general judgments about the reliability and security of the 
total set of features may have significant consequences for vulnerable or protected groups.
2- During the selection of the champion model, the fairness metric assessment should be 
considered. The champion model fairness metrics should be within the defined threshold for the 
sensitive features. The optimization approach of fairness and performance metrics should be 
clearly set throughout this phase. The fairness assessment should be justified if the champion 
model does not pass the assessment. 
Deploy and Monitor: 
1- Well-defined mechanisms and protocols should be set in place when deploying the AI system 
to measure the fairness and performance of the outcomes and how it impacts individuals and 
communities. When analyzing the outcomes of the predictive model, it should be assessed if 
represented groups in the data sample receive benefits in equal or similar portions and if the AI 
system disproportionately harms specific members based on demographic differences to ensure 
outcome fairness.
2- The predefined fairness metrics should be monitored in production. If there is any deviation 
from the allowed threshold, it should be investigated whether there is a need to renew the model. 
3- The overall harm and benefit of the system should be quantified and materialized on the 
sensitive groups.
3- Causality-based feature selection should be ensured. Selected features should be verified 
with business owners and non-technical teams. 
4- Automated decision-support technologies present major risks of bias and unwanted 
application at the deployment phase, so it is critical to set out mechanisms to prevent harmful 
and discriminatory results at this phase. 
14
AI Ethics Principles
Principle 2 – Privacy & Security
The privacy and security principle represents overarching values that require AI systems; 
throughout the AI System Lifecycle; to be built in a safe way that respects the privacy of the 
data collected as well as upholds the highest levels of data security processes and procedures 
to keep the data confidential preventing data and system breaches which could lead to 
reputational, psychological, financial, professional, or other types of harm. AI systems should 
be designed with mechanisms and controls that provide the possibility to govern and monitor 
their outcomes and progress throughout their lifecycle to ensure continuous monitoring within 
the privacy and security principles and protocols set in place.
Plan and Design: 
1- The planning and design of the AI system and its associated algorithm must be configured 
and modelled in a manner such that there is respect for the protection of the privacy of 
individuals, personal data is not misused and exploited, and the decision criteria of the 
automated technology is not based on personally identifying characteristics or information. 
2- The use of personal information should be limited only to that which is necessary for the 
proper functioning of the system. The design of AI systems resulting in the profiling of individuals 
or communities may only occur if approved by Chief Compliance and Ethics Officer, Compliance 
Officer or in compliance with a code of ethics and conduct developed by a national regulatory 
authority for the specific sector or industry. 
3- The security and protection blueprint of the AI system, including the data to be processed 
and the algorithm to be used, should be aligned to best practices to be able to withstand 
cyberattacks and data breach attempts.
4- Privacy and security legal frameworks and standards should be followed and customized for 
the particular use case or organization. 
5- An important aspect of privacy and security is data architecture; consequently, data 
classification and profiling should be planned to define the levels of protection and usage of 
personal data.
6- Security mechanisms for de-identification should be planned for the sensitive or personal 
data in the system. Furthermore, read/write/update actions should be authorized for the relevant 
groups.
15
AI Ethics Principles
Prepare Input Data: 
1- The exercise of data procurement, management, and organization should uphold the legal 
frameworks and standards of data privacy. Data privacy and security protect information from 
a wide range of threats. 
2- The confidentiality of data ensures that information is accessible only to those who are 
authorized to access the information and that there are specific controls that manage the 
delegation of authority. 
3- Designers and engineers of the AI system must exhibit the appropriate levels of integrity to 
safeguard the accuracy and completeness of information and processing methods to ensure 
that the privacy and security legal framework and standards are followed. They should also 
ensure that the availability and storage of data are protected through suitable security database 
systems.
4- All processed data should be classified to ensure that it receives the appropriate level 
of protection in accordance with its sensitivity or security classification and that AI system 
developers and owners are aware of the classification or sensitivity of the information they are 
handling and the associated requirements to keep it secure. All data shall be classified in terms 
of business requirements, criticality, and sensitivity in order to prevent unauthorized disclosure 
or modification. Data classification should be conducted in a contextual manner that does 
not result in the inference of personal information. Furthermore, de-identification mechanisms 
should be employed based on data classification as well as requirements relating to data 
protection laws. 
5- Data backups and archiving actions should be taken in this stage to align with business 
continuity, disaster recovery and risk mitigation policies.
Build and Validate:
1- Privacy and security by design should be implemented while building the AI system. The 
security mechanisms should include the protection of various architectural dimensions of an AI 
model from malicious attacks. The structure and modules of the AI system should be protected 
from unauthorized modification or damage to any of its components. 
16
AI Ethics Principles
Deploy and Monitor: 
1- After the deployment of the AI system, when its outcomes are realized, there must be 
continuous monitoring to ensure that the AI system is privacy-preserving, safe and secure. 
The privacy impact assessment and risk management assessment should be continuously 
revisited to ensure that societal and ethical considerations are regularly evaluated.
2- AI System Owners should be accountable for the design and implementation of AI systems in 
such a way as to ensure that personal information is protected throughout the life cycle of the AI 
system. The components of the AI system should be updated based on continuous monitoring 
and privacy impact assessment.
2- The AI system should be secure to ensure and maintain the integrity of the information it 
processes. This ensures that the system remains continuously functional and accessible to 
authorized users. It is crucial that the system safeguards confidential and private information, 
even under hostile or adversarial conditions. Furthermore, appropriate measures should be 
in place to ensure that AI systems with automated decision-making capabilities uphold the 
necessary data privacy and security standards.
3- The AI System should be tested to ensure that the combination of available data does not 
reveal the sensitive data or break the anonymity of the observation. 
Principle 3 – Humanity
The humanity principle highlights that AI systems should be built using an ethical methodology 
to be just and ethically permissible, based on intrinsic and fundamental human rights and 
cultural values to generate a beneficial impact on individual stakeholders and communities, 
in both the long and short-term goals and objectives to be used for the good of humanity. 
Predictive models should not be designed to deceive, manipulate, or condition behavior that is 
not meant to empower, aid, or augment human skills but should adopt a more human-centric 
design approach that allows for human choice and determination. 
17
AI Ethics Principles
Plan and Design:
1- It is essential to design and build a model that is based on the fundamental human rights and 
cultural values and principles that are applied within and on the AI system’s decisions, processes, 
and functionalities. 
2- The designers of the AI model should define how the AI system will align with fundamental 
human rights and KSA’s cultural values while designing, building, and testing the technology; 
as well as how the AI system and its outcomes will strive to achieve and positively contribute 
to augment and complement human skills and capabilities. 
Prepare Input Data: 
1- To ensure that AI models embody a human-centric build and design that requires adhering to 
practices of responsible and ethical data management frameworks and processes to be followed 
according to best practices and data regulations within KSA.
2- Data must be properly acquired, classiﬁed, processed, and accessible to ensure respect for 
human rights, and KSA’s cultural values and preferences. 
Build and Validate: 
1- When constructing AI systems, designers and engineers should prioritize building AI systems 
and algorithms that allow and facilitate decision-making with an outlook of aligning with human 
rights and KSA’s cultural values. The automated decisions that result from AI systems should not 
act in a partial and standalone manner without considering broader human rights and cultural 
values in their final outcomes and results. 
2- Designers and Engineers should enable AI systems with the appropriate parameters and 
algorithm training to attain outcomes that advance humanity.
18
AI Ethics Principles
Deploy and Monitor: 
1- Periodic assessments of the deployed AI system should be conducted to ensure that its 
results are aligned with human rights and cultural values, accuracy key performance indicators 
(KPIs), and impact on individuals or communities to ensure the continuous improvement of the 
technology. 
2- Designers of AI models should establish mechanisms of assessing AI systems against 
fundamental human rights and cultural values to mitigate any negative and harmful outcomes 
resulting from the use of the AI system. If any negative and harmful outcomes are found, 
the owner of the AI system should identify the areas that need to be addressed and apply 
corrective measures to recursively improve the functioning and outcomes of the AI system.
Principle 4 – Social & Environmental Beneﬁts
The social and environmental benefit principle embraces the beneficial and positive impact of 
social and environmental priorities that should benefit individuals and the wider community that 
focus on sustainable goals and objectives. AI systems should neither cause nor accelerate 
harm or otherwise adversely affect human beings but rather contribute to empowering 
and complementing social and environmental progress while addressing associated social 
and environmental ills. This entails the protection of social good as well as environmental 
sustainability. 
Plan and Design:
1- AI systems have a significant impact on communities and the ecosystems that they live in; 
hence AI System Owners should have a high sense of awareness that these technologies may 
have disruptive and transformative effects on society and the environment. The design of AI 
systems should be approached in an ethical and sensitive manner in line with the values of 
prevention of harm to both human beings and the environment. 
2- When planning and designing AI systems, due consideration should be given to preventing 
and helping address social and environmental issues in a way that will ensure sustainable social 
and ecological responsibility.
19
AI Ethics Principles
Prepare Input Data: 
1- The processes and policies that govern data management should be followed when preparing 
the categorization and structuring of data that will feed into the AI system.
2- The data pertaining to the social and environmental topics should be accessible to the public 
data infrastructure and must clearly articulate the social benefit of the data presented. 
Build and Validate: 
1- The models and algorithms must have, as their ultimate goal, a result linked to a socially 
recognized end, with the ability to demonstrate how the expected results relate to that social 
or environmental purpose through transformative and impactful benefits where applicable. 
2- It is best practice to measure and maintain acceptable levels of resource usage and energy 
consumption during this phase setting the tone that AI systems not only strive to foster AI 
solutions that address global concerns relating to social and environmental issues but also 
practice sustainable and ecological responsibilities.
Deploy and Monitor: 
1- After the deployment of the AI system, the AI System Owner should ensure that continuous 
assessment of the human, social, cultural, economic and environmental impact of AI 
technologies are carried out with full cognizance of the implications of the AI system for 
sustainability as a set of constantly evolving goals across a range of dimensions against the 
priority objectives that were set at the Plan and Design phase. 
2- The AI System Owner should also foster and encourage the power of AI solutions in 
addressing areas of global concern aligning with sustainable development goals.
20
AI Ethics Principles
Plan and Design:
1- Designing and developing an AI system that can withstand the uncertainty, instability, and 
volatility that it might encounter is crucial.
2- Planning to set out a robust and reliable AI system that works with different sets of inputs 
and situations is essential to prevent unintended harm and mitigate risks of system failures 
when positioned against unknown and unforeseen events.
3- Establishing a set of standards and protocols for assessing the reliability of an AI system 
is necessary to secure the safety of the system’s algorithm and data output. It is essential to 
keep a sustainable technical outlay and outcomes generated from the system to maintain the 
public’s trust and confidence in the AI system.
Principle 5 – Reliability & Safety
The reliability and safety principle ensures that the AI system adheres to the set specifications 
and that the AI system behaves exactly as its designers intended and anticipated. Reliability is 
a measure of consistency and provides confidence in how robust a system is. It is a measure of 
dependability with which it operationally conforms to its intended functionality and the outcomes 
it produces. On the other hand, safety is a measure of how the AI system does not pose a risk 
of harm or danger to society and individuals. As an illustration, AI systems such as autonomous 
vehicles can pose a risk to people’s lives if living organisms are not properly recognized, certain 
scenarios are not trained for or if the system malfunctions. A reliable working system should be 
safe by not posing a danger to society and should have built-in mechanisms to prevent harm.
The risk mitigation framework is closely related to this principle. Potential risks and unintended 
harms should be minimized in this aspect.
The predictive model should be monitored and controlled in a periodic and continuous manner to 
check if its operations and functionality are aligned with the designed structure and frameworks 
in place. The AI system should be technically sound, robust, and developed to prevent malicious 
usage to exploit its data and outcomes to harm entities, individuals or communities. A continuous 
implementation/continuous development approach is essential to ensure reliability.
21
AI Ethics Principles
Prepare Input Data: 
1- Adequate steps and actions should be taken to measure the data sample’s quality, accuracy, 
suitability, and credibility when dealing with the data sets of an AI model. This is essential 
to ensure the accuracy of data interpretation by the AI system, the consistency of avoiding 
misleading measurements, as well as ensuring the relevance of the AI system’s outcomes to 
the purpose of the model. 
2- It is crucial for the build and validate step to test how the system behaves under outlier events, 
extreme parameters, etc. In this step, stress test data should be prepared for extreme scenarios.  
Build and Validate: 
1- To develop a sound and functional AI system that is both reliable and safe, the AI system’s 
technical construct should be accompanied by a comprehensive methodology to test the quality 
of the predictive data-based systems and models according to standard policies and protocols.
2- To ensure the technical robustness of an AI system rigorous testing, validation, and 
re-assessment as well as the integration of adequate mechanisms of oversight and controls 
into its development is required. System integration test sign-off should be done with relevant 
stakeholders to minimize risks and liability. 
3- Automated AI systems involving scenarios where decisions are understood to have an impact 
that is irreversible or difficult to reverse or may involve life-and-death decisions should trigger 
human oversight and final determination. Furthermore, AI systems should not be used for social 
scoring or mass surveillance purposes.
4- The documentation standards are essential to track the evolution of the system, foresee 
possible risks and fix vulnerabilities. 
5- All critical decision points in the system design should be subject to sign-off by relevant 
stakeholders to minimize risks and make stakeholders accountable for the decisions.
22
AI Ethics Principles
Deploy and Monitor: 
1- Monitoring the robustness of the AI system should be adopted and undertaken in a periodic 
and continuous manner to measure and assess any risks related to the technicalities of the AI 
system (an inward perspective) as well as the magnitude of the risk posed by the system and 
its capabilities (an outward perspective).
2- The model must also be monitored in a periodic and continuous manner to verify whether 
its operations and functions are compatible with the designed structure and frameworks. The 
AI system must also be safe to prevent destructive use to exploit its data and results to harm 
entities, individuals, or groups. It is necessary to continuously work on implementation and 
development to ensure system reliability.
Principle 6 – Transparency & Explainability
The transparency and explainability principle is crucial for building and maintaining trust in AI 
systems and technologies. AI systems must be built with a high level of clarity and explainability 
as well as features to track the stages of automated decision-making, particularly those that 
may lead to detrimental effects on data subjects. It follows that data, algorithms, capabilities, 
processes, and purpose of the AI system need to be transparent and communicated as well as 
explainable to those who are directly and indirectly affected. The degree to which the system is 
traceable, auditable, transparent, and explainable is dependent on the context and purpose of 
the AI system and the severity of the outcomes that may result from the technology. AI systems 
and their designers should be able to justify how the rationale behind their design, practices, 
processes, algorithms, and decisions or behaviors are ethically permissible, nondiscriminatory, 
and nonharmful to the public.
Plan and Design:
1- When designing a transparent and trusted AI system, it is vital to ensure that stakeholders 
affected by AI systems are fully aware and informed of how outcomes are processed. They 
should further be given access to and an explanation of the rationale for decisions made by the 
AI technology in an understandable and contextual manner. Decisions should be traceable. AI 
system owners must define the level of transparency for different stakeholders on the technology 
based on data privacy, sensitivity, and authorization of the stakeholders. 
23
AI Ethics Principles
3- If the AI system is built by a third party, AI system owners should make sure that an AI Ethics 
due diligence is carried out and all the documentation are accessible and traceable before 
procurement or sign-off.
2- The AI system should be designed to include an information section in the platform to give 
an overview of the AI model decisions as part of the overall transparency application of the 
technology. Information sharing as a sub-principle should be adhered to with end-users and 
stakeholders of the AI system upon request or open to the public, depending on the nature 
of the AI system and target market. The model should establish a process mechanism to log 
and address issues and complaints that arise to be able to resolve them in a transparent and 
explainable manner.
Prepare Input Data: 
1- The data sets and the processes that yield the AI system’s decision should be documented 
to the best possible standard to allow for traceability and an increase in transparency. 
2- The data sets should be assessed in the context of their accuracy, suitability, validity, and 
source. This has a direct effect on the training and implementation of these systems since 
the criteria for the data’s organization, and structuring must be transparent and explainable in 
their acquisition and collection adhering to data privacy regulations and intellectual property 
standards and controls.
Build and Validate: 
1- Transparency in AI is thought about from two perspectives, the first is the process behind it 
(the design and implementation practices that lead to an algorithmically supported outcome) and 
the second is in terms of its product (the content and justification of that outcome). Algorithms 
should be developed in a transparent way to ensure that input transparency is evident and 
explainable to the end-users of the AI system to be able to provide evidence and information on 
the data used to process the decisions that have been processed. 
2- Transparent and explainable algorithms ensure that stakeholders affected by AI systems, 
both individuals and communities, are fully informed when an outcome is processed by the 
AI system by providing the opportunity to request explanatory information from the AI system 
owner. This enables the identification of the AI decision and its respective analysis which 
facilitates its auditability as well as its explainability. 
24
AI Ethics Principles
Deploy and Monitor: 
1- Upon deployment of the AI system, performance metrics relating the AI system’s output, 
accuracy and alignment to priorities and objectives, as well as its measured impact on individuals 
and communities should be documented, available and accessible to stakeholders of the AI 
technology.
2- Information on any system failures, data breaches, system breakdowns, etc. should be 
logged and stakeholders should be informed about these instances keeping the performance 
and execution of the AI system transparent. Periodic UI and UX testing should be conducted 
to avoid the risk of confusion, confirmation of biases, or cognitive fatigue of the AI system. 
Principle 7 – Accountability & Responsibility
The accountability and responsibility principle holds designers, vendors, procurers, developers, 
owners and assessors of AI systems and the technology itself ethically responsible and liable for 
the decisions and actions that may result in potential risk and negative effects on individuals and 
communities. Human oversight, governance, and proper management should be demonstrated 
across the entire AI System Lifecycle to ensure that proper mechanisms are in place to avoid 
harm and misuse of this technology. AI systems should never lead to people being deceived 
or unjustifiably impaired in their freedom of choice. The designers, developers, and people who 
implement the AI system should be identifiable and assume responsibility and accountability 
for any potential damage the technology has on individuals or communities, even if the adverse 
impact is unintended. The liable parties should take necessary preventive actions as well as 
set risk assessment and mitigation strategy to minimize the harm due to the AI system. The 
accountability and responsibility principle is closely related to the fairness principle. The parties 
responsible for the AI system should ensure that the fairness of the system is maintained and 
sustained through control mechanisms. All parties involved in the AI System Lifecycle should 
consider and action these values in their decisions and execution.
25
AI Ethics Principles
Plan and Design:
1- This step is crucial to design or procure an AI System in an accountable and responsible 
manner. The ethical responsibility and liability for the outcomes of the AI system should be 
attributable to stakeholders who are responsible for certain actions in the AI System Lifecycle. It 
is essential to set a robust governance structure that defines the authorization and responsibility 
areas of the internal and external stakeholders without leaving any areas of uncertainty to 
achieve this principle. The design approach of the AI system should respect human rights, and 
fundamental freedoms as well as the national laws and cultural values of the kingdom.
2- Organizations can put in place additional instruments such as impact assessments, risk 
mitigation frameworks, audit and due diligence mechanisms, redress, and disaster recovery 
plans. 
3- It is essential to build and design a human-controlled AI system where decisions on the 
processes and functionality of the technology are monitored and executed, and are susceptible 
to intervention from authorized users. Human governance and oversight establish the necessary 
control and levels of autonomy through set mechanisms.
Prepare Input Data: 
1- An important aspect of the Accountability and Responsibility principle during Prepare Input 
Data step in the AI System Lifecycle is data quality as it affects the outcome of the AI model 
and decisions accordingly. It is, therefore, important to do necessary data quality checks, clean 
data and ensure the integrity of the data in order to get accurate results and capture intended 
behavior in supervised and unsupervised models. 
2- Data sets should be approved and signed-off before commencing with developing the AI 
model. Furthermore, the data should be cleansed from societal biases. In parallel with the 
fairness principle, the sensitive features should not be included in the model data. In the event 
that sensitive features need to be included, the rationale or trade-off behind the decision for 
such inclusion should be clearly explained. The data preparation process and data quality 
checks should be documented and validated by responsible parties. 
3- The documentation of the process is necessary for auditing and risk mitigation. Data must be 
properly acquired, classified, processed, and accessible to ease human intervention and control 
at later stages when needed. 
26
AI Ethics Principles
Build and Validate: 
1- Model development of the AI system and algorithm should consist of the selection of 
features, hyperparameter tuning and performance metric selection. To achieve this, the technical 
stakeholders who build and validate models should be responsible for these decisions.
2- Assigning the appropriate ownership and communicating responsibilities will set the tone for 
accountability that would aid in steering the development of the AI system on good reasons, 
solid interference, and will allow the intervention of human critical judgement and expertise. 
3- The decisions should be supported with quantitative (performance measures on train/test 
datasets, consistency of the performance on different sensitive groups, performance comparison 
for each set of hyperparameters, etc.) and qualitative indicators (decisions to mitigate and correct 
unintended risks from inaccurate predictions).
4- The appropriate stakeholders and owners of the AI technology should review and sign oﬀ the 
model after successful testing and validation of user acceptance testing rounds have been 
conducted and completed before the AI models can be productionized. 
Deploy and Monitor: 
1- The responsibility and associated liability in the Deploy and Monitor step should be set 
clearly. The outcomes and decisions set in the build and validate step should be monitored 
continuously and should result in periodic performance reports. 
2- Predeﬁned triggers/alerts should be deﬁned for this step on the data and performance 
metrics. Setting these triggers is a rigorous process and each trigger should be assigned to the 
appropriate stakeholder. These triggers/alerts can be deﬁned as part of the risk mitigation or 
disaster recovery procedure and may need human oversight.  
27
AI Ethics Principles
Roles and
Responsibilities
SDAIA
Roles and Responsibilities
National Level
The AI Ethics Framework deﬁnes the following roles and responsibilities both at the national and 
entity level.
SDAIA works to review and update the principles of artificial intelligence ethics and monitor 
compliance with them. SDAIA also prepares national guides, standards, and directives that 
ensure the effective management and dissemination of artificial intelligence ethics at the 
Kingdom level and achieve the desired goal. In order to implement its objectives, the Authority 
may carry out the following tasks:
AI Ethics Development: Develop, issue, and update this AI Ethics principles and framework. 
This document should be revisited regularly to address possible changes affecting AI Ethics, 
associated regulations, communities, and the environment.
AI Ethics Adoption Plan Development:  Develop supporting material and provide 
continuous guidance to Adopting Entities to facilitate the adoption of this Framework. 
AI Ethics Advisory: Support Adopting Entities in complying with this Framework and answer 
any queries related to the AI Ethics and compliance with this document. 
AI Ethics Compliance Measurement:  Measure compliance of Adopting Entities on a 
regular basis based on the defined compliance mechanism directly or through sector 
regulators (Refer to the ‘Compliance’ section for more details) and audit AI Ethics activities 
when required. 
AI Ethics Compliance Monitoring: Conduct investigations and audits and monitor 
compliance with this Framework with the support of the National Regulatory Authorities.
29
AI Ethics Principles
Adopting Entities
Approve and oversee the implementation of the AI Ethics Plan within the Entity.
Designate diﬀerent roles with regard to AI Ethics.
Approve the AI Ethics annual report.
Take or delegate the necessary actions for the resolution of the issues that are raised by the 
CCO/CO.
Act as the ﬁrst point of contact between the Entity and the Authority. The Head of the Entity 
or CDO shall resolve any pending issues around AI Ethics for their respective Entity and 
escalate them to SDAIA whenever necessary.
All Adopting Entities shall have the primary responsibility for ensuring that their AI Ethics 
documents are published in compliance with these AI Ethics Principles. As such, Entities shall 
designate individuals who will be responsible for carrying out the AI Ethics activities as outlined 
below.
1- Head of the Entity / Chief Data Oﬃcer (CDO): Responsible for the AI Ethics practice within 
an Entity. Responsibilities include: 
Oversee the development of the AI Ethics Plan and present it to the head of the Entity. The 
CCO/CO shall also review the performance of AI Ethics to identify improvement opportunities 
and feed into the AI Ethics Plan.
Review the AI Ethics identification and prioritization activities, monitor AI Ethics KPIs for 
in-house and third-party systems, and ensure maintenance activities are being performed. 
Ensure compliance of the Entity’s AI Ethics activities with national regulations, including but 
not limited to Data Classification, Data Privacy, and Freedom of Information. Make sure that 
third-party systems comply with these Principles through contractual guarantees.
2- Chief Compliance Officer (CCO) / Compliance Officer (CO): The strategic lead of the 
AI Ethics practice, the CO is positioned under the CDO and reports directly to the CDO. The 
responsibilities of the CCO/CO shall include:
30
AI Ethics Principles
Develop the AI Ethics Plan, including the AI Ethics prioritization methodology, and set targets 
and KPIs to be agreed on with the CCO/CO or head of Entity/CDO.
Collaborate with other oﬃcers in managing, governing, and protecting data.
Deﬁning, updating, maintaining, and reviewing AI ethics priorities and procedures.
Educate and raise awareness across the Entity’s employees on AI Ethics and support national 
awareness campaigns in coordination with the CCO/CO. 
3- Responsible AI Officer (RAIO): The operational lead of Responsible AI within the entity 
and works collaboratively with other officers from the Data Management team. Responsibilities 
include:
Review communications channels and interactions with stakeholders to provide disclosure 
and eﬀective feedback channels. 
Conduct periodical reviews on the AI Ethics process and documentation. 
Continuously review AI Ethics KPI’s. 
Publish audit reports on the AI Ethics Assessment of the organization which covers the AI 
development and deployment process as well as the third-party AI product procurement 
process.
4- AI System Assessor: Responsible for auditing AI systems to achieve certain goals and has 
the following responsibilities: 
31
AI Ethics Principles
Optional Registration 
Optional Registration aims to motivate target entities to consider AI ethics when building and 
developing AI-based solutions to ensure a responsible use. 
Compliance
Motivational Badges 
The Authority may follow up and measure the level of commitment and compliance of 
registered entities and support them in evaluating compliance with the application of their 
AI ethics and submitting optional reports.
The level of compliance is measured according to the following:
Displaying the progress of the product or entity in complying with the checklist 
mentioned in the attachments of this document.
The authority can assist the entities in reviewing annual reports and make recommendations 
regarding general compliance with AI ethics. 
To motivate the implementing agencies to register and work with the principles of AI ethics, the 
Authority may provide motivational badges that will reflect the level of compliance and progress 
on AI ethics adoption. The Authority will issue a guide explaining the mechanism and controls 
for awarding them.
Results of internal or external evaluation of AI ethics.
Objectives of the product or entity and indicators for measuring the performance of AI 
ethics. 
The level of compliance to AI ethics and the fulfillment of its requirements and the badges 
obtained by the product or entity. 
32
AI Ethics Principles
Annexure

Annexure A: AI Ethics Tools
AI Fairness Position Statement: A fairness position statement allows the owner of the AI 
technology to clearly state the fairness criteria that have been employed by the AI system and 
explain the rationale and logic behind it in a direct and non-technical language. To implement 
a fair AI system in a sustainable way, choosing the right fairness objectives is key to setting 
the tone of the AI model in terms of its ethical standards and regulatory requirements. This is 
done by sharing the reasons and underlying fairness values expressed throughout the model 
as well as the decision-making process of the AI model to communicate and reach the wider 
audience. This document would be made accessible and available to the public and affected 
individuals and communities.
Ethical Impact Assessment: AI has accelerated innovation in how business is conducted 
and executed by practitioners, and therefore it is imperative to evolve AI system ethical 
impact assessments to identify areas that need adjustment and recalibrating to design 
the AI model into an ethically accepted technology to maximize its positive impact on 
complimenting human capabilities and skillsets. The objective of impact assessments is 
to evaluate and analyze the level of ethical impact of the AI technology on individuals or 
communities in both direct and indirect manners which enables the owner of the AI system 
to address identified issues and strengthen areas where improvements and adjustments 
are required. It is also essential to be able to assess the ethical risks that the AI system 
is projecting, analyze the discriminatory harm impact and accurate representation of the 
system on the ethical impact through a diversified and multi-stakeholder analysis, as well as 
act as a facilitator to address whether a model should move to production or deployment. 
One of the purposes of the ethical impact assessment is to help build public confidence 
around the AI system and demonstrate consideration and due diligence to wider the public 
audience.  
34
AI Ethics Principles
Privacy and Security Standards:  Privacy and security standards are in place to help 
companies improve their information security strategy by providing guidelines and best 
practices based on the company’s industry and the type of data they maintain. In the 
following table, some examples are given for privacy and security standards: 
Standard Name Link
ISO standards for artiﬁcial intelligence, such as the 
ISO 23894 risk standard and the standards issued 
by the Saudi Standards and Metrology Organization
https://www.iso.org/standard/77304.html
https://www.standards.ieee.org
https://www.nist.gov/cyberframework/framework 
https://www.nist.gov/itl/ai-risk-management-framework 
https://www.cisecurity.org/controls/ 
https://www.pcisecuritystandards.org/pci_security/ 
http://www.isaca.org/resources/cobit 
Standards of the Institute of Electrical and 
Electronics Engineers 
NIST Cybersecurity Framework (National 
Institute of Standards and Technology) 
NIST AI Risk Management Framework (National 
Institute of Standards and Technology) – Work 
in Progress
CIS Controls (Center for Internet Security 
Controls)
PCI-DSS (Payment Card Industry Data 
Security Standard)
COBIT (Control Objectives for Information 
and Related Technologies)
35
AI Ethics Principles
Architecture for Trustworthy AI:  The requirements that are stated in the AI Ethics 
Principles and Controls section should be reflected in the design of the AI system 
architecture. The AI system architecture should set the rules and restrictions across the 
AI System Lifecycle. The principles and controls are generic and addressing them to the 
particular use cases or AI systems should be done with the sense-plan-act theoretical 
approach. Adapting the architecture to AI Ethics entails the integration of the three steps 
of this approach: 
Sense: The system should be developed such that it recognizes all environmental 
elements necessary to ensure adherence to the requirements
Algorithm Assessment:  The objective of the algorithm assessment is to ensure that 
individuals or communities are informed about the use of algorithms and the weights 
and counterweights that exist to manage their use. The AI maturity of enterprises and 
government entities are different, and this assessment will show the improvement areas for 
the respective entities or government entities to improve descriptions on how algorithms 
inform or impact decision making, particularly in those cases where there is a degree of 
automatic decision making or where the algorithms support decisions that have a significant 
impact on individuals or groups. This assessment will balance the human oversight for 
efficient AI systems. 
The technical objectives of accuracy, reliability, safety, and robustness must be prioritized to 
ensure that the AI System functions safely. AI System Developers should build a system that will 
operate accurately and reliably, in accordance with the intended design, even when confronted 
with unexpected changes, anomalies, and disturbances.
Plan: The system should only consider plans that adhere to the requirements
Act: The system’s actions should be restricted to behaviors that realize the requirements.
36
AI Ethics Principles
Fairness Assessment:  It is a set of diagnostic methods that helps you compare how fair 
models and label markers perform for specific groups. It checks whether the model’s result 
is regularly overestimated or underestimated for one or more groups compared to others. 
Additionally, it evaluates how well the diversity of data is represented for each group. In the 
following table, fairness assessment tool examples are included
Tool Name Link
Google Model Card Toolkit https://github.com/tensorﬂow/model-card-toolkit 
AI Fairness 360 https://github.com/Trusted-AI/AIF360
Microsoft Fairlearn https://fairlearn.org/ 
Google What-if Tool https://pair-code.github.io/what-if-tool/ 
Aequitas Bias and Fairness Audit Toolkit http://aequitas.dssg.io/ 
Veritas Fairness Assessment Tool https://github.com/mas-veritas2/veritastool 
TensorFlow Fairness Indicators https://www.tensorﬂow.org/tfx/guide/fairness_indicators
AI Explainability 360 https://github.com/Trusted-AI/AIX360
37
AI Ethics Principles
38
AI Ethics Principles
AI Methods Explanation Report: As explained under Transparency and Explainability 
section, it should be explained why the system behaves the way it does and how it takes 
decisions. Although some training methods have superior performance, they work as 
black-box, and it is a challenge to interpret the results. Small deviations in the data could 
lead to dramatic deviations and changes in the outcome. The report should explain the 
behavior of the system as well as ensure the deployment of reliable technology. The report 
should help to better understand the AI system’s underlying mechanism as well as the 
interpretation of the outcomes. 
AI System stakeholders should consider the trade-off between performance, materialization, 
and explanation methods. In some cases, explanation methods increase complexity or 
require sacrificing performance. A cost-benefit analysis should be conducted and the level 
of explainability should be justified based on this analysis.
Algorithm Auditing: Unexpected algorithmic behaviors can be detected with algorithm 
audits. In general, algorithm audits are done on an ad-hoc basis, and it is important to 
standardize algorithm auditing process with supporting AI algorithms. The process should 
be systematic and continuous. Regulating and auditing AI systems for ethical compliance 
is more complicated than regulating and auditing human decision-making or processes. AI 
systems should be designed with due consideration of AI Ethics principles and controls. 
Auditing mechanisms should follow the same principles and controls in alignment with 
these principles. 
Safety Self-Assessment:  Safety considerations of accuracy, reliability, security, and 
robustness should be considered at every step of the AI System Lifecycle. AI system 
safety self-assessments should be continuously logged and documented in a way that 
allows review and re-assessment. The performance of AI system safety self-assessments 
should be conducted by relevant stakeholders at each stage of the workflow. They should 
evaluate how the design and implementation practices line up with the safety objectives 
of accuracy, reliability, security, and robustness. 
Data Protection Methods: These methods help to protect data by applying data 
transformation methods, especially for the data that is classified as sensitive. The following 
data protection methods are given as examples and they should be after data classification. 
Data De-Identification is the process of eliminating Personally Identifiable Data (PII) from 
any document or other media, including an individual’s Protected Health Information (PHI).
Data Anonymization  is a kind of data sanitization process that intends to protect the 
privacy of individuals. It is the process of removing PII from data sets to maintain the 
anonymity of individuals whom the data describes. It is often the preferred method for 
making structured medical datasets secure for sharing. 
Data Masking is a technique that removes or hides information, replacing it with realistic 
replacement data or fake information. The objective is to create a version that can’t 
be decoded or reverse engineered. There are a number of ways to change the data, 
including encryption, character shuffling, and word or character replacement. 
Data Pseudonymization  is a way of  masking data  that ensures it is not possible 
to attribute personal data to a specific person, without using additional information 
subject to security measures. It is an integral part of the EU General Data Protection 
Regulation (GDPR), which has several recitals specifying how and when data should 
be pseudonymized. 
Data Encryption is a method of data masking, used to protect it from cybercriminals, 
others with malicious intent, or accidental exposure. The data might be the contents of 
a database, an email note, an instant message, or a file retained on a computer. 
Data Tokenization is a process of substituting personal data with a random token. 
Often, a link is maintained between the original information and the token (such as for 
payment processing on sites). Tokens can be completely random numbers or generated 
by one-way functions (such as salted hashes). 
Data Loss Prevention (DLP): Data Loss Prevention (DLP) is used to detect and prevent 
data breaches. This involves monitoring network activity, identifying and blocking 
suspicious behavior, and implementing encryption and access controls.
39
AI Ethics Principles
40
AI Ethics Principles
Data Governance: Data Governance encompasses all aspects of data management 
throughout its entire life cycle, including security, usability, availability, and privacy. This 
involves defining data handling policies and processes and assigning data management 
authority and responsibilities.
Data Minimization:  Data minimization refers to the practice of collecting just the 
personal information required to satisfy a specified objective. This helps to mitigate the 
risks connected with data breaches and the abuse of personal information
Annexure B: AI Ethics Tools Mapping to
AI System Lifecycle
Tool Deploy & MonitorBuild & ValidatePrepare Input
DataPlan & Design
Fairness Position Statement
Ethical Impact Assessment
Privacy and Security Standards
Architecture for Trustworthy AI
Algorithm Assessment
Fairness Assessment
AI Methods Explanation Report 
Algorithm Auditing
Safety Self-Assessment
Data Protection Methods
41
AI Ethics Principles
Annexure C: AI Ethics Checklist
AI System Lifecycle Phase 1: Plan & Design
PD.1 Yes
Accountability & 
Responsibility
Accountability & 
Responsibility
Accountability & 
Responsibility
Accountability & 
Responsibility
Accountability & 
Responsibility
Accountability & 
Responsibility
Accountability & 
Responsibility
Accountability & 
Responsibility
Accountability & 
Responsibility
Did you design the appropriate level of human oversight for the AI 
system and use case? 
Does your AI system design prevent overconﬁdence in or overreliance 
on the AI system with necessary human intervention mechanisms?
Did you deﬁne human oversight processes with the appropriate KPIs 
and assign responsibility to the relevant parties?
Did you consider the liability and Data Subject protection 
requirements and take them into account?
Did you deﬁne thresholds of the KPIs and did you put governance 
procedures or autonomous actions in place to trigger 
alternative/fallback plans?
Did you provide training and education to help develop 
accountability practices?
Did you ensure that the AI Ethics Governance structure is 
compliant with the proposed governance mechanism in the 
National AI Ethics Policy?
Did you ensure that the AI Ethics Governance structure includes 
internal or external audit mechanisms?
Did you establish a strategy or a set of procedures to avoid creating 
or reinforcing unfair bias in the AI system, covering both input data as 
well as for the algorithm design?
PD.2
PD.3
PD.4
PD.5
PD.6
PD.7
PD.8
PD.9
PD.10
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Fairness
Fairness
Fairness
Fairness
Phase Question
Binding for
Third-party Principles
Did you identify sensitive personal data attributes relating to persons 
or groups that are systematically or historically disadvantaged? If so, 
the permissible limit that makes the assessment fair or unfair must 
be determined.
Did you deﬁne fairness assessment KPIs?
Did you consider a mechanism to include the participation of different 
stakeholders in the AI system’s development and use?
PD.11
PD.12
PD.13
PD.14
Did you conduct an impact analysis on how the AI system affects 
fundamental human rights and cultural values? Did you list any 
potential negative effects on fundamental human rights and cultural 
values and the solutions or recovery mechanisms?
Humanity
Did you design an operation and governance strategy to abort or 
intervene in the system when the system doesn't work in an 
intended way?
42
AI Ethics Principles
Did you put measures in place to ensure that the AI system does 
not lead to people being deceived or unjustiﬁably impaired in their 
freedom of choice?
Did you align your AI system with relevant standards or policies (for 
example, ISO, IEEE, Data Privacy Law) or widely adopted protocols 
for daily data management and governance?
Did you follow established protocols, processes, and procedures to 
manage and ensure proper data governance? Did you ensure that 
National Data Management and Personal Data Protection 
Standards are followed?
Did you ensure that data access control meets security, privacy, 
and compliance requirements? Did you design a log mechanism for 
audit and debug purposes?
Did you design a risk management strategy for your AI system? Did you 
include risk tiers, KPIs, risk assessment, and mitigation procedures?
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
PD.15
PD.16
PD.17
PD.18
PD.19
Humanity
Privacy & 
Security
Privacy & 
Security
Privacy & 
Security
Reliability & 
Safety
Question
Binding for
Third-party Principles
Fairness
Did you assess whether there is a likelihood that the AI system may 
cause damage or harm to users or third parties? Did you assess 
the potential damage, impacted audience, and severity?
Did you assess whether there is a likelihood that the AI system may 
unintentionally give wrong results or inaccurate predictions, fail or 
feed societal biases? 
Did you consider the potential impact or safety risk to the environment, 
living creatures, or society in addition to the Data Subjects?
Did you assess whether the system’s business model is aligned with 
the organization's vision and mission as well as the code of conduct?
Did you design an interpretable AI system where the data, algorithms, 
outcomes, and decisions are transparent and explainable to the 
related parties?
Did you design User Experience with human psychology in mind to 
avoid the risk of confusion, conﬁrmation bias, or cognitive fatigue?
Was there any trade off assumption?
Have you established a measurement or assessment mechanism for 
privacy impact?
Has the data management approach been reviewed based on 
human-centric values and according to data regulations within 
the KSA?
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
PD.20
PD.21
PD.22
PD.23
PD.24
PD.25
PD.26
PD.27
PD.28
Reliability & 
Safety
Reliability & 
Safety
Social & 
Environmental 
Beneﬁts
Transparency 
& Explainability
Transparency 
& Explainability
Transparency 
& Explainability
Humanity
Privacy & 
Security
Phase
43
AI Ethics Principles
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
PID.1
PID.2
PID.3
PID.4
PID.5
PID.6
PID.7
PID.8
PID.9
PID.10
AI System Lifecycle Phase 2: Prepare Input Data
Question
Binding for
Third-party Principles
Is there an established mechanism that ﬂags issues related to data 
privacy or protection in the process of data collection and processing?
Has the data been reviewed in terms of scope and categorization?
Are there processes to ensure that AI systems are secure and keep 
information safe, conﬁdential, and private, as well as the integrity of the 
processed information even under hostile or adversarial conditions?
Has the quality and source of the acquired data been assessed 
through set processes?
Has there been an assessment on whether an analysis can be 
performed post training and testing the data?
Has diversity and inclusion of the dataset at hand been considered 
or reviewed?
Has an analysis process been developed for the proxies of the 
sensitive features?
Is there an established mechanism that measures whether  the 
integrity, quality, and accuracy of data collection and its sources 
have been evaluated and data is up to date?
Has the data been reviewed to check if personal data is evident 
within the dataset? Is there an established mechanism that allows 
the AI model to train without or with minimal use of personal or 
sensitive data?
Is there an established mechanism that controls the usage of 
personal data (such as valid consent and the possibility to revoke, 
when applicable)?
Privacy & 
Security
Privacy & 
Security
Privacy & 
Security
Privacy & 
Security
Privacy & 
Security
Privacy & 
Security
Transparency 
& Explainability
Fairness
Fairness
Accountability & 
Responsibility
Has the team evaluated the classiﬁcation, processing, and access 
to data to ensure that it has been properly acquired?
Have the data and AI models been validated to include respect 
for human rights, values, and cultural preferences in the Kingdom 
of Saudi Arabia?
Did you classify the data using SDAIA recommendations? If you 
use other standards, please mention them. 
Are there appropriate procedures to measure the quality, accuracy, 
relevance, and credibility of a data sample when dealing with data 
sets for an AI model?
PID.11
PID.12
PID.13
PID.14
Humanity
Humanity
Social & 
Environmental 
Beneﬁts
Reliability & 
Safety
Phase
44
AI Ethics Principles
AI System Lifecycle Phase 3: Build & Validate
Question
Binding for
Third-party Principles
Has the behavior of the system been tested against unexpected 
situations and environments? Is there a deﬁned fallback plan if the 
AI model encounters adversarial attacks or other unexpected 
situations? Have the fallback plans been tested and conﬁrmed?
Are there deﬁned processes that outline procedures to describe 
actions to be taken when an AI system fails in different contexts? 
Have the processes been tested? 
Are there deﬁned processes that outline procedures to describe 
when an AI system fails in different contexts? Have the processes 
been tested? 
Is there an established mechanism of communication to assure 
the end-users of the system’s reliability?
BV.1
BV.2
BV.3
BV.4
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Reliability & 
Safety
Reliability & 
Safety
Reliability & 
Safety
Reliability & 
Safety
Are there clear and understandable deﬁnitions explaining why the 
outcomes of the AI system took a certain decision?
Has the model been built in a simple and interpretable manner?
Has an examination of the AI model's interpretability been 
successfully completed after the model's training?
Has there been a research exercise done relating to the use of 
available technical tools to be able to improve the understanding of 
the data, model, and its performance?
Are there established processes and quantitative analysis to test and 
monitor for potential biases and the overall fairness of the system 
during the development of the system? Are there mechanisms in place 
to protect any individuals or groups who might be disproportionately 
affected by negative implications?
Are there any established mechanisms that assess whether the AI 
system encourages humans to develop attachment and empathy 
towards the system? Are there mechanisms that ensure that the AI 
systems' social interaction is simulated and that it has no capacity 
for "feelings"?
Have the stakeholders approved the successful tests and 
validated rounds of user acceptance testing prior to the 
production of AI models?
Did you use any sensitive data/ attributes in the model? If so, 
justify the use of sensitive personal data attributes or their proxies?
Are there AI approaches and algorithms that allow and facilitate 
decision-making alignment with human rights and KSA’s 
cultural values?
BV.5
BV.6
BV.7
BV.8
BV.9
BV.10
BV.11
BV.12
BV.13
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
No
No
No
Transparency 
& Explainability
Transparency 
& Explainability
Transparency 
& Explainability
Fairness
Fairness
Fairness
Humanity
Accountability & 
Responsibility
Social & 
Environmental 
Beneﬁts
Phase
45
AI Ethics Principles
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
DM.1
DM.2
DM.3
DM.4
DM.5
DM.6
DM.7
DM.8
DM.9
DM.10
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
AI System Lifecycle Phase 4: Deploy & Monitor 
Question
Binding for
Third-party Principles
In case of a chatbot or other communication systems, are the end-users 
aware that they are interacting with a non-human correspondent?
Are there mechanisms to measure if the system is producing an 
unacceptable amount of inaccurate predictions?
Are the persons who are accessing the data qualiﬁed with the 
necessary competences to understand the details of data 
protection requirements?
Are there mechanisms in place to assess the level of inﬂuence the 
AI system may have on end-users’ decision-making?
Is there a process set in place, which is clear and explainable, to 
inform end-users of the reasons, criteria, and beneﬁts behind the 
outcomes and results of the AI system? Are there clear steps of 
communication on how and to whom issues can be raised?
Is there a process set in place to collect and consider the end-users' 
feedback and adopt it into to the system?
Are there established processes and quantitative analysis to monitor 
biases and the overall fairness of the system during the deployment 
of the system?
In the case of variability, did you establish a measurement or 
assessment mechanism of the potential impact of such variability 
on fundamental rights?
Is there a set strategy in place to monitor and measure if the AI 
system is meeting the goals, purposes, and intended applications?
Has the team assessed the AI system's vulnerabilities to potential 
attacks, revelation of sensitive data, or breaking the conﬁdentiality?
Are there established mechanisms to ensure fairness in your 
AI systems? 
Is the information about the AI system accessible to end-users of 
assistive technologies?
Are there established mechanisms to measure the social and 
environmental impact of the AI system’s deployment and use?
Are there established mechanisms to ensure the application of 
fundamental human rights?
Are there established processes for third parties or workers to 
report potential vulnerabilities, risks, or biases in the AI system?
DM.11
DM.12
DM.13
DM.14
DM.15
Accountability & 
Responsibility
Accountability & 
Responsibility
Reliability & 
Safety
Privacy & 
Security
Privacy & 
Security
Transparency 
& Explainability
Transparency 
& Explainability
Transparency 
& Explainability
Fairness
Fairness
Fairness
Fairness
Accountability & 
Responsibility
Accountability & 
Responsibility
Social & 
Environmental 
Beneﬁts
Phase
46
AI Ethics Principles
Question
Binding for
Third-party Principles
Are there established mechanisms to demonstrate your compliance 
with the principles set out in this document?
Are there established mechanisms that allow for redress in case 
of the occurrence of any harm or adverse impact?
Are there established mechanisms that provide information to 
end-users/third parties about opportunities for redress?
Are there continuous monitoring techniques to ensure that the AI 
system maintains privacy and security?
Are there periodic assessments of the deployed artiﬁcial intelligence 
systems to ensure the implementation of fundamental human rights 
and cultural values of the Kingdom?
DM.16
DM.17
DM.18
DM.19
DM.20
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Accountability & 
Responsibility
Accountability & 
Responsibility
Accountability & 
Responsibility
Privacy & 
Security
Humanity
Phase

SDAIA.GOV.SA SDAIA_SA SDAIA.SAUDI SDAIA-KSA